
Learning from Learning Curves: Discovering Interpretable
Learning Trajectories

Lujie Chen
Carnegie Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA
lujiec@andrew.cmu.edu

Artur Dubrawski
Carnegie Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA
awd@cs.cmu.edu

ABSTRACT
We propose a data driven method for decomposing popula-
tion level learning curve models into mutually exclusive dis-
tinctive groups each consisting of similar learning trajecto-
ries. We validate this method on six knowledge components
from the log data from an online tutoring system ASSIST-
ment. Preliminary analysis reveals interpretable patterns of
”skill growth” that correlate with students’ performance in
the subsequently administered state standardized tests.

CCS Concepts
•Information systems ? Data analytics; Clustering;

Keywords
Learning curves, Student models, Clustering

1. INTRODUCTION
Learning curves are intuitive tools of descriptive analy-

sis often used in learning science to characterize students’
growth of skill or knowledge with experience. A popula-
tion level skill-specific learning curve may be constructed by
aggregating all students’ performance at a sequence of time-
ordered learning opportunities. This construction implicitly
assumes the homogeneity of students’ learning trajectories,
which may not hold in reality due to the disparity either in
terms of prior knowledge or individual learning rates.

Much has been explored to cluster students into sub-groups
with the goal to improve prediction. For instance [Trivedi
et al. 2011] proposed K-means and spectral clustering meth-
ods using the dynamic features gathered from students’ in-
teraction with an intelligent tutor, the clusters are then used
to train ensemble models for predicting post-test scores. The
focus of this work is to explicitly model students’ learning
trajectories for the purpose of discovering and understand-
ing the heterogeneous patterns of ”skill growth” of the stu-
dents as well as their implications on their performance in
the subsequent tests.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

LAK ’17 March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada
c© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).

ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03.

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029449

2. DATA AND METHODS
We used the ’Assistments Math 2004-2005 (912 Students)’

data accessed via DataShop [Koedinger et al. 2010]. It con-
tains logs of 912 middle school students interacting with AS-
SISTment, an online tutoring system that provides help or
hints at each step of math problem solving. These logs are
linked with the post-test scores from MCAS (Massachusetts
Comprehensive Assessment System) of the same set of stu-
dents. We used the student-step roll up data available from
DataShop summarizing students’ performance at each learn-
ing step which was annotated with a version of a Knowledge
Component (KC) model comprised of 39 skills.

For each specific KC, we extracted the first-attempt per-
formance (correct or incorrect) for each student, with each
response indexed by the opportunity count that starts with
1 and increments by 1 for each additional opportunity that
student encounters. For steps annotated with multiple KCs,
we assigned the step level performance for each of the KC
involved. For this analysis, we selected 6 KCs with at least
several hundred students each of whom had practiced at
least 10 times on those KCs.

Based on the student-level performance data described
above, we then fit a Group Based Model (GBM, [Nagin
2005]) to discover distinct groups of learning trajectories.
GBM models a set of learning curves as a mixture of poly-
nomial functions with timestamps (in our case, the oppor-
tunity count indices) as the covariates. For a given learning
curve of length T, assuming K groups, the likelihood func-
tion of the observed trajectory is provided as follows:

K?
i=1

?i

T?
j=1

Pi(Yj |Xj) (1)

where ?i and Pi are respectively the prior probability of data
belonging to a certain group and the likelihood function for
group indexed by i. Yj is the response variable value at
step j, in our case it is student’s performance in a binary
form; and Xj is the covariate, in our case it is the oppor-
tunity count (i.e., Xj = j). Given the assumed number of
distinct groups of learning trajectories (K) and the chosen
order of the polynomials, the model estimates K smooth,
polynomial in time trajectories one for each of the groups.
The form of the likelihood function Pi is determined by the
response variable. In our case, since the response variable is
binary value of 0 and 1, we used the Bernoulli distribution.
The GBM model also estimates the prior distribution of the
group membership across data. The model parameters are
inferred using Maximum Likelihood method through a nu-



0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Opportunity

A
cc

u
ra

cy

group
1

2

3

Figure 1: Estimated mean learning curves by group
(solid lines) and 95% confidence intervals, overlaid
with estimated latent polynomial functions (dotted).

0

10

20

30

1 2 3
Group

m
e

a
n

 M
C

A
S

 s
c
o

re

group
1

2

3

Figure 2: Mean MCAS scores for each of the learn-
ing trajectory groups with 95% confidence intervals.

merical optimization procedure. In this experiment, we fit
models with K = 3 groups and polynomial functions up to
the third degree for each group.

Posterior group membership for each individual student’s
learning curve can then be computed as follows:

P (Group = i|Y,X) =
??i

T?
j=1

P?i(Yj |Xj)

K?
i=1

??i
T?

j=1

P?i(Yj |Xj)
(2)

In order to assess the predictive utility of discovered groups,
we correlate the posterior group membership for each stu-
dent with their MCAS scores, from there the ANOVA p-
values are computed and predictive accuracies are estimated.

3. RESULTS
Figure 1 summarizes one main output from GBM for one

of the KC named “P.2.8-evaluating-algebraic-expressions”,
which is learned by 388 students. The plot shows the learn-
ing curve distributions aggregated from students belonging
to each of the group as computed from maximum posterior
group membership probability 2. The plot is overlaid (dot-
ted line) with model’s estimated group trajectories (i.e., the
latent polynomial function). As shown, the first group (red)
is the most likely to be comprised of students who learned
very little within the first 10 steps as suggested by the almost

flat learning curve, while the second group (green) represents
a subset of students who seemed to learn quickly t first but
then slipped into a “forgetful state” as evidenced by the drop
of their learning curves after 5 steps. The students in the
third group (blue) follow a steadily increasing learning tra-
jectory. Presumably, this type of students are most likely to
show good performance in subsequent tests.

We then correlate the posterior group memberships with
MCAS scores. As shown in Figure 2, the mean score for the
1st group is the lowest as expected. Students from the 2nd
group achieved significantly higher scores on average but not
as high as the 3rd group who exhibited “healthy” learning
curves. ANOVA p-value less than 0.001 suggests an overall
correlation between group membership and post test scores.
Similarly significant relationships have been found for all of
the other five KCs evaluated.

We further estimated the potential predictive utility of
group membership by predicting each student’s MCAS test
score using the mean score of the group that the student
belongs to, based on which we compute Mean Absolute Error
(MAE). For the six KCs we studied, MAD ranges from 8.77
to 9.49, which is on par with the performance of the cluster-
ensemble model reported in [Trivedi et al. 2011].

4. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a method to model heterogeneity of stu-

dents’ learning trajectories by employing a group-based ap-
proach. In our preliminary analysis that models step-level
student log data for 6 different KCs, we noted interesting dis-
tinct group level patterns of skill growth that can be readily
interpreted. In addition, the observed significant correlation
between posterior group membership and MCAS scores sug-
gests that the apparent heterogeneity of learning trajectories
is reflected in the students’ performance in the future tests.
Future work will investigate the likely cause for particular
patterns of learning curves (e.g., the forgetting phenomenon
in the green plot in Figure 2), to evaluate the opportunity
for interventions that might shift students to the more ef-
fective trajectories. We will also study the utility of our ap-
proach for early detection of group membership when only
initial performance data is available, to inform timely inter-
ventions.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research reported here was supported, in whole or in

part, by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.Department
of Education, through Grant R305B150008 to Carnegie Mel-
lon University. The opinions expressed are those of the au-
thors and do not represent the views of the Institute or the
U.S. Department of Education.

6. REFERENCES
[Koedinger et al. 2010] Koedinger, K. R., R. S. J. Baker,

K. Cunningham, and A. Skogsholm (2010). A Data
Repository for the EDM community : The PSLC
DataShop. Handbook of Educational Data Mining , 43–55.

[Nagin 2005] Nagin, D. (2005). Group-based modeling of
development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[Trivedi et al. 2011] Trivedi, S., Z. Pardoz, and
N. Heffernan (2011). Spectural Clustering in Educational
Data MIning. Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Educational Data Mining , 129–138.



