
Temporal Analytics with Discourse Analysis:  
Tracing Ideas and Impact on Communal Discourse 

Alwyn Vwen Yen Lee 
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 

50 Nanyang Avenue 
Singapore 639798 

alwynlee@ntu.edu.sg 

Seng Chee Tan 
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 

50 Nanyang Avenue 
Singapore 639798 

sengchee.tan@ntu.edu.sg 

 
 

ABSTRACT 
This paper presents a study of temporal analytics and discourse 
analysis of an online discussion, through investigation of a group 
of 13 in-service teachers and 2 instructors. A discussion forum 
consisting of 281 posts on an online collaborative learning 
environment was investigated. A text-mining tool was used to 
discover keywords from the discourse, and through social network 
analysis based on these keywords, a significant presence of relevant 
and promising ideas within discourse was revealed. However, 
uncovering the key ideas alone is insufficient to clearly explain 
students’ level of understanding regarding the discussed topics. A 
more thorough analysis was thus performed by using temporal 
analytics with step-wise discourse analysis to trace the ideas and 
determine their impact on communal discourse. The results 
indicated that most ideas within the discourse could be traced to the 
origin of a set of improvable ideas, which impacted and also 
increased the community’s level of interest in sharing and 
discussing ideas through discourse.  

CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing ? Education ? Computer Assisted 
Instruction.  

Keywords 
Learning Analytics; Discourse Analysis; Temporality; Social 
Network Analysis; Idea Measurement 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Learning analytics as a nascent field has been gathering broad 
interests in educational research and practice [13], and recent 
research has contributed significantly to further our understanding 
of learning processes [30]. Discourse analysis has long been 
conducted to analyze language beyond literal language use, and 
detailed analysis of online discussions can inform the design and 
improve the productivity of knowledge creation [6]. The analysis 
of discourse over time can provide additional insights of agent 
interactions and specifically students’ level of understanding in 
discussions. However, this form of temporal analysis is often an 
undervalued process that is not studied in greater detail [18], 
resulting in broad and ambiguous conclusions to be drawn from 
studies. By combining the usage of discourse analysis with 

temporal analytics, we propose to integrate data sources and 
analysis from interactions and discourse among students during 
learning activities. The results obtained from such analysis could 
provide clearer indications on how temporal analysis of discourse 
could provide feedback that is useful for learning.  

To conduct an analysis of temporal features within group 
interactions, emergent methods and measures are required for 
characterizing temporal dynamics [24]. Usage of networks, 
especially social networks can provide substantial insights into the 
quantity and types of relationships that exist between participants 
of the network. The problem of analyzing and understanding 
complex networks is understandably a challenging one, but it could 
also be seen as an area of research that contains utmost potential. 
In this regard, social network analysis (SNA) [29, 32] has become 
one of the most commonly applied methods in learning analytics 
research [4].  With the prevalent usage of online databases and ease 
of access to an abundance of data, little temporal data are being 
used by analysts to provide a deeper understanding of the content 
[24]. Even with the abundance of platforms and tools that are used 
with SNA [17], few studies can make full use of network analysis, 
and there has yet to be significant breakthroughs that assist 
researchers in furthering the understanding of learning.  

By using novel methods in conjunction with SNA [17], students 
can learn deeply to understand the meaning behind written text and 
spoken words [1] through feedback and assistive tools. The 
standard social network measures (eg., degree, closeness, 
betweeness, centrality) can represent learning processes and 
interactions within the group to a certain extent using network 
graphs, but they are restricted in the ability to provide the 
descriptive and quantitative feel of individual student’s or a 
community’s level of engagement. There is a limit to what SNA 
can achieve by inference, as most network variables and 
relationships are heavily dependent on user or analyst’s 
interpretations and can be tedious and challenging especially with 
large scaled-up networks. Also, research findings have so far been 
unable to robustly conclude or determine which types or 
combination of network measures can predictably determine levels 
of understanding within the group [32].  

Therefore, by making use of the current prevalence of learning 
analytics deployed alongside discourse platforms, SNA can be 
combined with temporal analysis to determine sections of discourse 
where feedback and interventions could prove to be most helpful in 
helping to stimulate and increase students’ engagement in the 
discourse. By seeking to automate the procedure of discourse 
analysis with temporal analytics, larger social networks can be 
tackled and similarly analyzed without requiring educators to sift 
through all the contents within the discourse manually. The 
following research question is to be addressed: How could temporal 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components for this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org, 
LAK’17, March 13–17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03…$15.00. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027386  



analytics assist discourse analysis in tracing ideas and impact on 
discourse to gauge students’ and community’s level of 
understanding? 

2. BACKGROUND 
2.1 Social Network Analysis 
Social Network Analysis (SNA) is the process of investigating 
social structures using network and graph theories, and has been 
adopted since the 1930s [29], with the focus mainly on three 
standard social network measures: degree, closeness, and centrality 
[10]. The degree of a graph indicates the number of edges incident 
to a vertex or referred in this paper as a node. Metrics such as 
closeness centrality is often used to denote average lengths of the 
shortest path between all nodes in the graph. Studies have shown 
that it is often unclear how these network measures can be 
associated with learning outcomes, for example, whether a higher 
social centrality could lead to higher academic performance [10, 
32]. In addition, it can be difficult to generalize models and try to 
apply them to scaled-up experiments or deployments within 
schools. 

Advancement in technology has provided an array of newer 
technology and tools that can be used with SNA [17], which were 
previously technologically unfeasible but now integrated into 
social network analysis. By analyzing the interactions as key 
measurements within the social network, educators who have been 
using online platforms for teaching (e.g., online discussion forums, 
learning management systems) could then also focus on the content 
that students generate as part of their learning process. As the 
majority of online content are mainly text, it is only natural that 
content analysis programs such as text mining and image 
comparison are integrated to assist in deeper analysis. Further, there 
are works that made use of neural networks [3], which are computer 
systems modeled on the human brains, and fuzzy clustering 
algorithm [25] that allow data to belong to two or more clusters. 
These are possible content analysis methods, indicating the large 
range of technology that could provide assistance in the analysis of 
educational data using more efficient manners. However, the 
results from these analyses tend to be inconclusive in helping us to 
answer our research question of how ideas can provide the meaning 
of context and impact discourse within a community. As most 
current tools and analysis platforms perform specific roles in 
summarization work [17], they are therefore not suitable to be used 
for analysis and scaffolding for deeper learning. 

2.2 Online discourse analysis 
Discourse analysis has long been a framework and means of 
exploring the imbrications between language and social-
institutional practices [9]. Pioneers Gilbert and Muckay [11] started 
by examining scientific dispute and analyzed how claims were 
made and positions were defended. Discourse analysis has since 
evolved with different interpretations, but the focus has always 
been explicitly on language as a social action, with discourse and 
argumentation as tools which participants use to compare thinking, 
shaping of agreements, exploring and identifying of ideas [7]. With 
technological advancements, written discourse has been moved 
onto online platforms and expressed within online learning 
environments, with accompanying analysis of online discourse 
becoming much more prevalent and ubiquitous.  

2.3 Temporal analysis 
The emergence of temporal analytics provides a different 
dimension in which data could be analyzed and also allows 
researchers to pay attention to details that transpire in parallel to 
other main events within the timeline. A common understanding of 

how time entails for different parties involved in a social network 
is, therefore, crucial for navigating through series of events that 
unfold over time [19], and procedures often require segmentation 
of the timeline to be analyzed. There is also a need to bridge the 
gap between temporal details which are mostly collected at the 
micro level [18] and underlying theory which operates on a macro 
level. Temporal patterns [5] are also able to provide insights of 
students’ actions from clickstream data, showcasing the potential 
for determining predictive actions and potential interventions.  

The process of analyzing ideas is, however, complicated, could 
consist of events and content that overlap with each other and 
transpire over short periods of time. The commonly used “code and 
count” methods that aggregate results over time [31] tend to ignore 
fine-grained details and would, therefore, mask minute yet possibly 
significant details that could indicate the level of understanding 
within an individual or community at a particular time juncture 
within the discourse. Moreover, understanding of content within 
any discourse is heavily dependent on the context and is often not 
generalizable [12], especially when the textual content is framed 
within a certain structure that requires deeper analysis so as to 
understand the intentions and motive of the writer truly. Hence 
there needs to be an integrated and scalable method where ideas can 
be automatically identified, be verified to be part of learning 
outcomes as pre-determined by the teachers, while not losing 
contextual information during the process of determining ideas 
within the discourse. 

2.4 Analyzing Ideas and Relevant Tools 

2.4.1 Definition and Focus on Ideas 
John Locke used the word idea to represent the most basic unit of 
human thought, and these immediate objects of perception are 
interesting to him as they point beyond themselves [16]. The 
general concept of an idea is more than just a unit of thought, but 
one which allows room for improvement. The crucial feature in 
ideas is not so much about the content of ideas, but rather what the 
ideas are capable of doing, such as providing the epistemic function 
to represent something else, and the ability to improve beyond itself 
in order to provide a different higher level of understanding. 

We propose to understand the effects of ideas on discourse, as 
knowledge is mediated by ideas and the search for improvable ideas 
subsequently leads to the creation of new knowledge. Within a 
traditional instruction-based classroom, most ideas within the 
community are provided by teachers and are also mostly limited in 
improvability, due to the factual nature and pre-assigned sources of 
content, such as structured syllabus designated by authorities and 
institutions. Communications within classrooms are also often 
constrained by a one-way instruction from teacher to students, with 
little room for feedback or inquiries from students, due to limited 
time for cramming of syllabus into the academic year. Therefore, 
by identifying and searching for improvable ideas, we are striving 
to discover communally interesting ideas present in the community 
discourse that can be improved through sharing of knowledge and 
may prove elusive to the human eye but can be detected using 
temporal analytics with social network analysis in a time-efficient 
manner.  

2.4.2 Engaging Ideas through Knowledge Building 
Ideas are complex entities, representation of opinions and 
knowledge, especially difficult to interpret when represented by 
textual format within online discussion communities. Problems that 
have to be addressed are also difficult to solve, and the use of either 
quantitative or qualitative approaches alone is inadequate to 
address this complexity. Small talk (30%) and logistic information 



are major sources of information overload on discussion forums 
which do not enhance learning experience [2], and hence there is a 
need to identify and filter out main ideas from discourse, which are 
essential for maintaining interest within the community. 

In the present study, we choose to focus on using knowledge 
building [27] as our model of knowledge creation, among other 
models such as the transformation of activity system and the 
creation of new products at organizational level [8, 20]. Knowledge 
building is a pedagogical approach that engages students in 
continual production and improvement of ideas useful to the class 
community through the collaborative efforts of its members [27]. 
Using knowledge building, the learner’s capability of natural idea 
generation can be leveraged for continual improvement of ideas, 
and for teachers to maintain student engagement in idea 
improvement. The identification of ideas within discourse is a 
natural approach towards efficient learning, and discourse itself 
often plays a creative role in encouraging improvements on ideas 
[14]. We acknowledge the concept of idea improvement [26] as 
being crucial to students who are often required to have motivation 
in their search for solutions to handle significant challenges. 
Students have to be aware of emergent themes of inquiry from 
multiple sources of inputs, acknowledge knowledge gaps, and 
participate in collaborative idea improvement [34].  

Therefore, to ensure that students continue to stay engaged in the 
learning process throughout their learning journey, they are 
encouraged to participate in knowledge building discourse to share 
and continuously improve their ideas. This paper investigates and 
analyzes content from knowledge building discourse, which allows 
learners to engage in collaborative inquiry to enable creation, 
contribution, and advancement of community knowledge. By 
engaging students in knowledge building discourse, students could 
collaboratively build on each other ideas so as to meaning-make 
and also improve the community’s level of understanding through 
deeper learning.  

2.4.3 Analyzing Ideas using SNA and Keywords 
To analyze temporal aspects of knowledge building discourse, we 
used an analysis platform, Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer 
(KBDeX) [22]. KBDeX was developed with technological 
affordances for visualizing student interaction networks, discourse 
unit networks, and keyword networks. As KBDeX was created with 
SNA in mind and the backend analytical processes are catered for 
this specific purpose; standard social network measures are offered 
and measurements such as density and centrality are often chosen 
for determining the level of interaction between students [33]. 
KBDeX is a unique analysis platform that allows users to conduct 
a step-by-step analysis of social networks through visual displays 
of networks and the respective social measures. This unique step-
wise functionality of assessing discourse allows us to pause the 
discourse at any time junctures of the discourse, conduct the 
necessary analysis before moving onto the next timeframe of 
discourse. Other than visual indicators and prompts to assist users, 
standard social network measures can be retrieved for a more 
detailed form of analysis that provides insights into the interactivity 
between different nodes and related networks. Overall, the role of 
KBDeX is to provide a discourse analysis platform that fulfills the 
role of idea identification and also provide step-wise analysis of a 
continuous discourse through social network analysis using 
keywords. 

As the commonly used type of SNA is insufficient in examining 
community knowledge advancement through students’ 
collaboration and interaction networks [21], text analysis processes 
such as identification of fundamental or advanced usage of 

keywords becomes increasingly and specifically important in 
determining ideas in discourse. This is so since keywords can be 
representative of knowledge that is recognized and understood by 
the students. At times, the usage of keywords within text might not 
be wholly representative of a student’s thoughts and ideas, or could 
also be misrepresented by students due to incorrect conceptual 
understanding. However, when these individual opinions are 
situated within discourse as part of the community’s sequence of 
thoughts, the usage of keywords and content can be monitored to 
understand further the overall usage flow of keywords and how 
they are used within the discussion threads in response to their 
peer’s ideas and thoughts.    

Therefore, it is important to seek out tools that can determine 
keywords from a text. SOBEK is a tool that can identify relevant 
keywords and concepts within the text, through the frequency 
analysis of textual material and selection of important related 
keywords [23]. Text mining is often used for extracting relevant 
information from unstructured data, which in this case, from 
sources such as the knowledge building discourse. Graphs are 
constructed with connections between related nodes, for users to 
better understand relevant terms, with frequency and sizes of nodes 
indicating frequency of usage. Similar concepts are also run 
through an inbuilt thesaurus to consolidate common terms and 
ideas into a single node. The primary purpose of implementing 
SOBEK within this present study is not only for displaying graphs 
visually to users but also mainly for determining keywords from a 
statistical perspective, to be provided as inputs to social network 
analysis using KBDeX.   

 

3. METHODS 
3.1 Dataset and Setting 
The dataset involved in this study was obtained from the discourse 
of a single graduate-level course, delivered by two instructors over 
a period of 13 weeks.  The graduate class consists of 13 in-service 
teachers who were undergoing further training and professional 
development. Participants were encouraged to actively share their 
thoughts and opinions using a computer-supported collaborative 
learning environment called Knowledge Forum [28]. A total of 281 
Knowledge Forum notes, referred as discourse units (DU) in this 
paper, were written with each of the 13 students providing at least 
a note of a reasonable amount of content. The role of the two 
teachers was to facilitate the lesson and co-create knowledge. Over 
the span of 13 weeks, students learned and applied the basic 
principles of knowledge building, and shared with the community 
on how knowledge building could be applied to affect, improve and 
apply to future learning opportunities for themselves and classes 
that they would instruct.  

Each weekly lesson of three hours would consist of discussions and 
sharing sessions regarding readings that would be prepared for 
lessons. Instructors are available to provide face-to-face instruction 
during lessons and can provide consultation if help is required in 
understanding topics. The participants were able to use scaffoldings 
and analytical tools to help each other improve ideas and to also 
reach a greater level of communal understanding. The participants 
were provided with credentials to use Knowledge Forum 
throughout the duration of the course, as this was the principal way 
in which teaching staff interacted with them during the weekly 
instructional sessions and outside of classrooms. This 
asynchronous mode of learning is a means of learning that allows 
the participants to engage in discussions transcending time and 
space, also ensuring knowledge building as a continuous process is 



not restricted within lessons but can also be conducted outside of 
classrooms with inputs and considerations from authentic learning 
situations. 

3.2 Procedures and Measures 

3.2.1 Using SOBEK for finding keywords 
Our previous design made use of expert opinion for determining 
keywords [15]. For the present study, we used text-mined keywords 
to represent ideas which are not obtained from domain experts, that 
is, the instructors for the course. There are a few reasons for 
following this course of action: the possibility that there could be 
inherent bias from experts regarding the field of knowledge when 
deciding keywords; the scope of knowledge regarding the topic 
could instinctively be narrowed down to only a specific range of 
keywords which the instructors would want the participants to 
learn; and keywords determined by experts often originate from 
their own perspectives and experience, often neglecting keywords 
that are representative of students’ views and opinions within 
discourse. The text-mined keywords would provide an unbiased 
source of ideas obtained from the participant-generated discourse. 
SOBEK allows us to filter out common words such as ‘a’, ‘the’, 
‘with’, related prepositions and adverbs to ensure important 
keywords and concepts are captured during the analysis. Similar 
concepts represented by different words were also consolidated 
under a common keyword so that there would be less repetitive 
synonyms, while relationships between different keywords are also 
linked together to indicate inter-keyword relationships. 

3.2.2 Using KBDeX for Social Network Analysis 
Text-mining of discourse data using SOBEK would provide a list 
of keywords that could be provided as input for KBDeX to conduct 
SNA. KBDeX provides social network analysis on three different 
kinds of discourse data: (a) the participating students and teachers, 
(b) discourse units, and (c) the identified keywords within 
discourse. These three categories of data are considered as nodes 
within their respective networks, such as student network, 
discourse unit network, and keywords network. As time is a 
continuous variable within discourse analysis, it is inevitable that it 
has to be broken down into discrete segments to compare and 
contrast different portions of the discourse. KBDeX assists with 
this segmentation process by designating discourse from different 
agents into turns, such that all participants are included in a turn-
based discussion. Analysts are therefore able to determine the total 
number of discussion units within the discourse, the initiating time 
of specific discourse units and the related keywords which are 
highlighted in color, together with the actual contents of the unit, 
all within a single view (see Figure 1). 

 

 

As this study analyzes the relationships between sets of keywords 
within discourse units, we use the discourse unit network within 
KBDeX for analysis, with the help of underlying bipartite graphs 
that determine relationships between discourse units and keywords. 
For example, discourse units A, B and C in the discourse unit 
network contain texts of “What is learning?”, “Learning is a 
process.” and “I understand knowledge building.”. If “learning” is 
an identified keyword, discourse units A and B will be connected 
through the keyword. This sequence is then repeated for all 
discourse units and keywords in the respective discourse unit and 
keyword networks, to form a bipartite graph.  

3.2.3 Using Betweenness Centrality Measure for 
Analyzing Temporality 
The present study uses a conventional network measure, 
betweenness centrality (BC) coefficient to detect and identify 
important connections between words inside discourse units. We 
interpret the BC coefficient as the degree of importance of 
discourse units within discourse and consider the ideas within these 
units as relevant to the context and forum discussions at the point 
in time. Through graphical displays, we can identify and determine 
time junctures where the ideas are initiated, shared or fade over the 
entire discourse. By viewing the BC measure of a specific discourse 
unit that spans over multiple time junctures, the observed trend of 
BC values is representative of the unit’s significance and the 
subsequent impact on community discourse after its introduction 
into the discourse space. 

 

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
There are two major aspects of analysis in this study:1) the use of 
auto-mining tools to help determine keywords and relationships 
within discourse, and 2) using keywords to find promising ideas, 
and making use of temporal analytics to assist and provide 
additional insights pf the promising ideas in discourse analysis.   

4.1 Keywords and Relationships 
The discourse was collected and anonymized at the end of the 
course before being parsed through SOBEK for determination of 
the keywords. We used a frequency threshold setting of 50, which 
sets the criterion to display keywords that appear more than 50 
times within the discourse. This setting was chosen, because it 
provides an average of 10 to 15 relevant keywords for the whole 
discourse, and this number is comparable to the number of 
keywords that experts provided to us in previous studies [15]. A 
total of 11 keywords were found, as shown in Table 1 with their 
respective frequency counts throughout the discourse. 

 

Table 1. Keywords with frequency from SOBEK 

Keyword Frequency Keyword Frequency 

knowledge 325 kb 273 

learning 172 students 151 

knowledge 
building 

151 understanding 114 

discourse 82 community 79 

idea 67 based 63 

information 55   

 Figure 1. Segmented Discourse View in KBDeX. 



These keywords were used as indicators to determine ideas that 
students are generating and discussing regarding the topic of 
knowledge building. The usage of keywords in discourse often 
represents inquiry to understand the concepts behind keywords 
further, and could reflect learners’ possession of knowledge. 
However, it could also be construed as misconceptions. On the one 
hand, keywords could be unique words which are unlikely to be 
repeated without sufficient evidence of understanding. On the other 
hand, misconceptions could complicate processes of 
understanding, especially if it is propagated within a community 
without verification. Through discourse, misinterpretations can be 
corrected through knowledge sharing and critique by other learners, 
or through corrective guidance from the teacher.  

The relationship between text-mined keywords are displayed in the 
graph (Figure 2) and the graphical interpretation shows that ideas 
related to knowledge building as an approach to learning are 
naturally linked to the following keywords ‘knowledge’, ‘learning’ 
and ‘community.' A closer qualitative look at the content in 
discourse units show that ideas regarding the understanding of 
‘knowledge building’ are present within the discourse, and this is 
representative of the participants’ understanding regarding this 
field of knowledge. From the keyword graph, we can determine that 
participants’ perspectives are varied and the graph encapsulates a 
rudimentary level of understanding on the assigned topic. 

We made further adjustments to SOBEK so as to determine if more 
advanced concepts and principles, such as knowledge building 
principles (e.g., ‘improvable ideas’ and ‘rise above’) are present 
within the discourse. These are some of the principles explored by 
researchers and were not present or linked within the initial graph 
in Figure 2. As there are interests in discovering the presence of 
such principles within discourse, we subsequently relaxed the 
frequency criterion in SOBEK to a frequency threshold setting of 
15, that is, any keywords with at least 15 appearances within the 
discourse will appear in the graph. The keywords ‘idea 
improvement’ and ‘rise above’ were eventually found in our 
analysis, and ‘idea improvement’ was illustrated with linkage to the 
main keyword ‘kb’ with a frequency count of 16, which explains 
the relatively smaller size of the node (see Figure 3). Among a large 
amount of keywords in discourse, the presence of the ‘idea 
improvement’ principle was largely obscure and hidden in Figure 
2, but with an expanded search, the principle can be found as shown 
in Figure 3. Hence we question if it is possible to detect lesser 
discussed but nevertheless important ideas using a more optimized 
method such as text mining for keywords, as compared to casting 
the net wide and capturing less important keywords that might 
deviate discussions. By using temporal analysis, previously 
unnoticed ideas can be found in an alternatively more visible 
manner, such as through analysis of BC trends over time.  

  

 

In addition to the process of relaxing this criterion during analysis, 
we also noticed that the number of identified keywords increased 
significantly and there are not many conclusions that could be made 

about the larger keyword network, apart from indicating presence 
or absence of keywords and possible ideas. We recognize that even 
though the analysis of social networks based on keywords provided 
relationships and detects presence of ideas within discourse, the 
process of identifying keyword relationships was, however, unable 
to adequately show the process of improving ideas and deeper 
understanding of students within discourse. Therefore, there is a 
need to conduct a more detailed analysis such as using temporal 
analytics to provide greater insights and also track the improvement 
of ideas throughout the entire discourse. 

 

4.2 Analyzing Temporality of Discourse 
By focusing on the temporal dimension of discourse, we were able 
to observe how the content, usage of language and connectedness 
of discourse units within the discussion space change over time. 
Although the frequency of keyword usage can be tracked, we 
focused on the usage of BC trends of individual discourse units. 
Prior work such as the I2A methodology [15] has shown that ideas 
within discourse can be identified and classified to give an 
indication of the communal understanding and an approximate 
number of ideas within discourse.  In essence, I2A methodology 
involves visualization and step-wise analysis of discourse network 
measures using SNA and measurement coefficients of chosen 
keywords to trace the evolvement of ideas within a discourse space. 
This methodology was validated with a qualitative analysis but 
previously only contains a brief temporal analysis. In this paper, we 
seek to provide a more detailed analysis using the present study, to 
show that identified ideas with potential to improve can be further 
worked on through tracking of ideas and understanding of their BC 
trends. With the understanding of BC trends, we are able to show 
how a certain idea was influencing or was influenced by other 
ideas, and subsequently how its introduction into the discourse 
impacted overall community discourse. 

4.2.1 Finding promising ideas with I2A methodology 
Firstly, we applied the I2A methodology with the help of KBDeX, 
in searching through the whole discourse to identify groups of 
ideas. The methodology then classified the ideas according to their 
level of promisingness, a combined measure of the following 
attributes, namely 1) idea relevancy to context, 2) underlying 
motive of idea initiation, and 3) impact of idea on the community. 
These attributes were measured from the perspectives of 
participants within the community, be it students who are 
consumers of content or teachers who help co-create knowledge in 
the community. This methodology was similarly applied to the 

Figure 2. Graph of relationships between keywords text-
mined from discourse. 

Figure 3. ‘Idea improvement’ (highlighted rectangle 
linked to ‘kb’) within large network of keywords. 



current study to obtain indications of promising ideas. Discourse 
units with high relevancy and significantly high community interest 
displayed significant peaks in their respective BC trends with 
consistent fluctuations, and are classified as containing promising 
ideas (see Figure 4). The y-axis in Figure 4 denotes the normalized 
BC values, while the x-axis indicates the number of discourse turns 
in the whole discourse.  

Discourse units in this paper are named with ‘DU’ followed by a 
number that represents the turn in which the discourse unit was 
introduced into the discourse. We identified discourse units that 
contain promising ideas using I2A, and choose to discuss a few such 
as DU8, DU18 and DU66. These discourse units are frequently 
engaged by the community and consistently garnered community 
interests during the discourse. The ideas were traced to understand 
how and when were they initiated, how did the ideas change over 
time, and whether the ideas created impact or influenced other 
discourse units within the discourse. 

 

4.2.2 Tracing ideas and impact on discourse  
Tracing ideas within DUs allow us to determine if the ideas stem 
from a curious inquiry, factual statement or belongs to part of an 
outlandish claim. We can also gauge the reception of these DUs by 
the community, whether they are cursorily accepted or ignored, 
sufficiently thought-invoking that invite queries and discussion, or 
are disruptive content that sparks debate from the time of initiation 
within the discourse. There are two phases of the BC trends where 
ideas within the DUs can be analyzed. The first phase occurs when 
the DU is introduced into the discourse, and the second phase is the 
period after the DU’s point of introduction till the point when ideas 
in the DU eventually fade out or when the discourse ends, 
whichever comes first. By focusing on these two phases, we can 
differentiate and temporally classify the different BC trends.  

Using data from the present study, we analyzed DU8 and DU66, 
because both discourse units exhibited differing types of BC trends 
during the early phases of discourse (see Figure 5). The I2A 
methodology has previously classified the two discourse units as 
containing promising ideas, and therefore the second phases are 
expectedly similar, where the BC trends are consistent with high 
fluctuating values due to constant engagement and interest from the 
community.  

On the one hand, with regards to the first phase, where the idea was 
initially introduced and the BC values peaked at a relatively high 
value, we know that there is an immediate interest by the 
community in the contents of the mentioned DU that could lead to 
further debates. The ideas within this kind of DU tend to be 
thought-invoking, novel or disruptive, which in any case naturally 
leads to more discussions among a larger part of the community. 
An example that exhibits this type of BC trend is DU66, which was 

introduced in the early-middle part of discourse at turn 66 but was 
able to invoke interest from the community rapidly.  

On the other hand, if the DU does not exhibit any significantly 
drastic BC changes when the discourse unit was initially introduced 
into the discourse, it is safe to then label the contained ideas within 
the DU as the typical type of assertion that does not require too 
much attention by the community at that particular juncture in the 
discourse. However, subsequent increasing BC values and trends 
that arise in later parts of the discourse mean that there was a 
delayed pick-up in communal interests, signaling a possible return 
of interests to a previously discussed topic or concept. Both 
discourse units DU8 and DU18 exhibit such similar behavior, and 
are therefore classified as having low initial community interests 
upon introduction but contain significantly promising ideas that 
impact later stages of the discourse.  

We show DU8 in Figure 5 with low initial community interests 
when initiated at Turn 8, and significant communal interest picked 
up later during the discourse at Turn 24. DU66, however, initiated 
at Turn 66 and immediately registered a spike in communal 
interests when the discourse unit was introduced. 

  

  

The two different types of BC trends belonging to DU8 and DU66 
suggest that the temporal pattern of communal interests in ideas 
could be predicted using social network measures such as BC. We 
verify the observations in this study by scrutinizing the qualitative 
contents of the DUs to determine if the nature and contents of the 
DUs are consistent with how the community perceives the 
discourse units. As both DU8 and DU66 are lengthy and descriptive 
in nature, the important parts of the discourse units are mentioned 
in the following quotations.  

Excerpt of DU8 from Student S7: knowledge is a very complex 
entity. philosophically, knowledge refers to justified true belief. in 
other words, knowledge is a form of beliefs which one may possess. 
what differentiates knowledge from a belief is the process one takes 
to reason to oneself why s/he thinks that this belief is true. …… is 
also called propositional knowledge. there exist other forms of 
knowledge, …… learning refers to a process where one acquires 
new knowledge with respect to the learner ……  

knowledge building (kb) can be seen as a way of learning, where 
learners gain new knowledge in the process. this happens in a 
community setting, where students come to gather to generate their 
inquiry, contribute their different views (questions, ideas, theories, 
etc.) about the topic of interest. it is an interactive process where 
students may perform individual research before coming back to 
revisit some of these ideas that were originally proposed. the 
purpose is to improve the ideas, or perhaps if i may call it 
knowledge to the group of learners. …… 

Figure 4. BC graphs of the three chosen DUs containing 
promising ideas. 

Figure 5. Different BC trends exhibited by DU8 (low 
initial interest) and DU66 (immediate interest). 



DU8 was written by student S7 in response to generic questions 
that were posed to the learning community, regarding knowledge, 
learning and knowledge building. The general concepts were 
explained with details using examples and DU8 was considered a 
well-written note, despite being initially uninteresting to the 
community due to its lengthy response and the community’s lack 
of familiarity and metaknowledge about the topic in the early stages 
of discourse. However, the community started paying more 
attention to DU8 after subsequent DUs (DU 21 to DU26) consisting 
of inquiries from the community required a clear explanation, and 
students started seeking for answers and explanations from DUs 
that transpired earlier in the discourse. We detected students 
retrospectively referring to DU8 after Turn 26, resulting in a higher 
BC trend for DU8, even though there were other similar DUs that 
were present in later stages of the discourse. Students realized that 
other students’ DUs were unable to adequately address their 
inquiries and concerns as succinctly and clearly as S7’s note (DU8). 
Another discourse unit that we analyzed is from Student S6 and the 
following excerpt is quoted summarily from DU66. 

Excerpt of DU66 from Student S6: in the first lesson of the course, 
I posted the commonly asked question of "how different or similar 
are knowledge sharing, knowledge construction and knowledge 
creation? Subsequently, we were being tasked to read the two 
articles …… further questions evolved after the reading: 
(1) how different or similar is justification of true beliefs 
(knowledge) from validation of knowledge? …… (2) what are the 
differences and similarities of authentic knowledge building and 
creation of professional knowledge? Eventually, T1 mentioned in 
the second lesson that kb and kc are equivalent. however, how are 
they equivalent? Why are they equivalent? In the pursuit of deeper 
understanding, I read an article-"distinguishing knowledge 
sharing, knowledge construction, and knowledge creation 
discourses that explains the differences between the 
terminologies … … personally, I think this question and line of 
thought would have implications on the implementation of kb in 
school settings where teachers have once explored the usage of 
discussion forums/bulletin boards, blogs etc. for instructional 
practice. How is kb distinctive from other pedagogies? How is KF 
different from other technological tools? Is the tool an essential or 
supplemental? these are practical questions on the "how" 
(implementation of kb). what do the rest of you think?  

There was significant community interest in the discourse unit right 
from the moment in time when it was introduced at discourse turn 
66. This level of interest was maintained throughout the discourse, 
leading us to believe that DU66 contained ideas and content that 
were sufficiently intriguing to the community while providing food 
for thought for the community. S6 pointed out differences in similar 
processes of knowledge sharing and knowledge building while 
encouraging the community with thought-invoking questions to 
further discuss and debate on Knowledge Forum.  

Upon further scrutiny, it was determined that the ideas and content 
within DU66 consist of deeper analysis built onto an earlier 
discourse unit DU25 by the same student S6. The student S6 had 
previously provided his/her perspectives in addition to thought 
processes, and have additionally conducted follow-up research to 
understand the topic in his/her own capacity further. The analyzed 
DU66 was written one week after the first discourse unit DU25, 
therefore serving as a report of S6’s findings over the week to the 
community, and also forms part of the documentation chain that S6 
used for reflecting on his/her learning. The community 
acknowledged the effort put into DU66 in the following DUs by 
answering and discussing mentioned topics within DU66. 
Participants in the community were also challenged to improve on 

this group of ideas, by building onto S6’s perspectives regarding 
the topic, so as to further discussion regarding the practical 
implementation of knowledge building within the classroom. 

Overall, the three analyzed discourse units (DU8, DU18 and DU66) 
attracted significant community interests in their content over the 
entire period of discourse within the study. Most ideas in the three 
discourse units either acted as sources which students continuously 
referred to, or served as inspiration for improving ideas within 
discourse. Even though DU8 and DU18 attracted delayed 
communal interest sometime after introduction in discourse, the 
ideas within the two mentioned discourse units were eventually 
broadly shared and built upon within the community. DU66 
managed to invoke immediate interests from the community and 
sustained community engagement throughout the period of 
discourse, and this was sufficiently backed up by qualitative 
analysis of the discourse unit.  

Temporal analysis of BC trends provided us with deeper insights of 
how ideas can be traced within discourse units and an alternative 
method of analyzing discourse. The usage of temporal analytics 
with discourse analysis aids us in further understanding of how 
ideas can influence and impact overall community discourse. 

 

5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We examined the use of temporal analytics with a step-wise 
discourse analysis of an online discussion, which provided insights 
into the nature and evolution of ideas that were proposed by 
students. We used text mining techniques through SOBEK to 
obtain an unbiased set of keywords, which were used with social 
network analysis and I2A methodology to identify and classify 
ideas in the study of student discourse. We traced the ideas and 
determined the impact of these ideas on subsequent discourse using 
the BC measure and temporal analysis of BC trends. Overall 
findings show that identified ideas within discourse can be 
improved through collaborative discussions on forums, and a more 
thorough understanding of ideas can be achieved through tracking 
and analyzing the impact of promising ideas on discourse.  

We are currently building on this study with similar 
implementations of analytical tools and methodology presented 
within this paper on archived data. In addition, we intend to use 
data obtained from ongoing lessons and make use of outcomes 
obtained through analysis to provide educators with actionable 
feedback, so as to conduct interventions to improve online teaching 
and learning. 

 

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The research reported here is supported by the Centre for Research 
and Development in Learning, Nanyang Technological University 
(CRADLE@NTU). The research team would also like to thank the 
teaching staff and students who participated in this study. 

 

7. REFERENCES 
[1] Biggs, J. 1999. What the student does: teaching for enhanced 

learning. Higher Education Research & Development, 18, 1, 
57-75. 

[2] Brinton, C. G., Chiang, M., Jain, S., Lam, H. K., Liu, Z., and 
Wong, F. M. F. 2014. Learning about social learning in 
MOOCs: From statistical analysis to generative model. In 
IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 7, 4, 346-359. 



[3] Bünz, D. and Gütschow, K. 1985. CATPAC - An interactive 
software package for control system design. Automatica, 21, 
2, 209-213. 

[4] Cela, K., Sicilia, M., and Sánchez., S. 2015. Social Network 
Analysis in E-Learning Environments: A Preliminary 
Systematic Review. Educational Psychology Review, 27, 1, 
219–246. 

[5] Chen, B., Haklev, S., Harrison, L., Najafi, H. and Rolheiser, 
C., 2015. How do MOOC Learners’ Intentions Relate to 
Their Behaviors and Overall Outcomes?. Statistics, 53, 5.  

[6] Chiu, M. M., and Fujita, N. 2014. Statistical Discourse 
Analysis of Online Discussions: Informal Cognition, Social 
Metacognition, and Knowledge Creation. In Knowledge 
Creation in Education. Springer Singapore, 97-112. 

[7] De Liddo, A., Shum, S.B., Quinto, I., Bachler, M. and 
Cannavacciuolo, L., 2011. Discourse-centric learning 
analytics. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference 
on Learning Analytics and Knowledge. ACM, 23-33. 

[8] Engeström, Y. 1999. Activity theory and individual and 
social transformation. In Perspectives on activity theory, Y. 
Engeström, R. Miettinen and R.-L. Punamäki, Eds. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 19-38. 

[9] Fairclough, N., 2013. Critical discourse analysis: The 
critical study of language. Routledge. 

[10] Freeman, L. C. 1978. Centrality in social networks 
conceptual clarification. Social networks, 1, 3, 215–239. 

[11] Gilbert, G.N., Mulkay, M. 1984. Opening pandora's box: A 
sociological analysis of scientists' discourse. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, England. 

[12] Holsti, O.R. 1969. Content analysis for the social sciences 
and humanities, Addison-Wesley Pub. Co. 

[13] Johnson, L., Smith, R., Willis, H., Levine, A., and Haywood, 
K. 2011. The 2011 horizon report. The New Media 
Consortium, Austin, Texas. 

[14] Lakatos, I. 1970.The methodology of scientific research 
programmes. In Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, I. 
Lakatos and A. Musgrave, Eds. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, England, 91-195. 

[15] Lee, V. Y. A., Tan, S. C., & Chee, J. K. K. 2016. Idea 
identification and analysis (I2A): A search for sustainable 
promising ideas within knowledge-building discourse. In 
Transforming learning, empowering learners: The 
International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 
2016, Singapore. International Society of the Learning 
Sciences, 90-97. 

[16] Locke, J. 1841. An essay concerning human understanding. 

[17] Lowe, W. 2002. Software for content analysis–A Review. 
Cambridge: Weatherhead Center for International Affairs 
and the Harvard Identity Project. 

[18] Mercer, N. 2008. The seeds of time: Why classroom dialogue 
needs a temporal analysis. The Journal of the Learning 
Sciences, 17, 1, 33–59. 

[19] Molenaar, I., 2014. Advances in temporal analysis in 
learning and instruction. Frontline Learning Research, 2, 4, 
15-24. 

[20] Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. 1995. The knowledge-creating 
company: How Japanese companies create the dynamics of 
innovation. Oxford University Press. 

[21] Oshima, J., Oshima, R., and Knowledge Forum Japan 
Research Group. 2007. Complex network theory approach to 
the assessment on collective knowledge advancement 
through scientific discourse in CSCL. In Proceedings of 
CSCL 2007, Mahwah, NJ. Lawrence Erlbaum, 563-565. 

[22] Oshima, J., Oshima, R., and Matsuzawa, Y. 2012. 
Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social network 
analysis application for knowledge building discourse. 
Educational technology research and development, 60, 5, 
903-921. 

[23] Reategui, E., Epstein, D., Lorenzatti, A., and Klemann, M. 
2011. Sobek: a text mining tool for educational applications. 
In International Conference on Data Mining, 59-64. 

[24] Reimann, P. 2009. Time is precious: Variable-and event-
centred approaches to process analysis in CSCL research. 
International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative 
Learning, 4, 3, 239–257. 

[25] Rodrigues, M.M. and Sacks, L., 2004, December. A scalable 
hierarchical fuzzy clustering algorithm for text mining. 
In Proceedings of the 5th International conference on recent 
advances in soft computing, 269-274. 

[26] Scardamalia, M. 2002. Collective Cognitive Responsibility 
for the Advancement of Knowledge. In Liberal Education in 
a Knowledge Society, B. Smith Ed. Open Court, Chicago, 67-
98. 

[27] Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C. 2003. Knowledge building. 
Encyclopedia of Education. Macmillan Reference, New 
York, NY, 1370-1373. 

[28] Scardamalia, M. 2004. CSILE/Knowledge Forum. In 
Education and technology: An encyclopedia, Santa Barbara. 
ABC-CLIO, 183-192.  

[29] Scott, J. 2012. Social Network Analysis. SAGE Publications. 

[30] Siemens, G. 2013. Learning Analytics: The Emergence of a 
Discipline. American Behavioral Scientist. 57, 10, 1380-
1400. 

[31] Suthers, D. 2006. Technology affordances for intersubjective 
meaning making: A research agenda for CSCL. International 
Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 
3, 315-337. 

[32] Wasserman, S., and Faust, K. 1994. Social network analysis: 
Methods and applications. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, England. 

[33] Wortham, D.W. 1999. Nodal and Matrix Analyses of 
Communication Patterns in Small Groups. In Proceedings of 
the Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 
1999 Conference, Palo Alto, CA. Stanford University, 681-
686. 

[34] Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., and Messina, R. 2009. 
Designs for collective cognitive responsibility in knowledge 
building communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 
1, 7–44.

 



