
Utilizing Visualization and Feature Selection Methods to 
Identify Important Learning Objectives in a Course 

Farshid Marbouti 
San Jose State University 

San Jose, CA 
farshid.marbouti@sjsu.edu 

Heidi Diefes-Dux, Krishna Madhavan 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN 

{hdiefes, cm}@purdue.edu 

ABSTRACT
There have been numerous efforts to increase students’ academic 
success. One data-driven approach is to highlight the important 
learning objectives in a course. In this paper, we used 
visualization and three feature selection methods to highlight the 
important learning objectives in a course. Identifying important 
learning objectives as well as the relation among the learning 
objectives have multiple educational advantages. First, it informs 
the instructors and students of the important topics in the course; 
without learning them properly students will not be successful. 
Second, it highlights any inconsistencies in defining the learning 
objective, how they are being assessed, and design of the course. 
Thus, this approach can be used as a course design diagnostic 
tool.  

CCS Concepts
• Applied Computing ?	 Education ? Computer Assisted
Instruction 

Keywords
Learning Objectives, Feature Selection, Information 
Visualization, Engineering Education, First-Year Engineering. 

1. INTRODUCTION
One approach to help students be successful in their courses and 
consequently in their program of study is to utilize data collected 
by instructors during courses. Instead of merely relying only on 
instructors’ experience or anecdotal evidence, another way to 
learn how to enhance students’ success is to analyze students’ 
performance data [1, 2] using learning analytics methods. The 
results of such analyses provide information for both instructors 
and students that can help instructors understand what leads to a 
student passing or failing a course and provide better ways to 
promote academic success.  

2. RESEARCH PURPOSE/QUESTION
It is important to understand what leads to students’ success in a 
course. In this paper, we highlighted which learning objectives are 
related with success in the course. These relations provide 
information that can be used by instructors and advisors to help 
at-risk students improve their learning. This paper answers the 
following research question: What are the relationships between 
student success and achievement of different learning objectives? 

3. METHODS
3.1 Data Source and Settings 
This study used secondary data collected during the Spring 2013 
and 2014 semester offering of a first-year engineering (FYE) 
course at a large Midwestern U.S. university. In each semester, 
approximately 1650 FYE students enrolled in the course. Nearly 
20% of the FYE students were female and about 20% were 
international students. This course is a required second semester, 
2-credit hour course for all FYE students.  

In this FYE course, homework assignments were graded based on 
learning objectives. Each homework was designed and assessed 
based on 6-7 learning objectives (e.g., draw and interpret 
flowcharts containing decision branches to characterize an 
engineering problem; write evidence-based rationales). Learning 
objectives were assessed on a four-point scale: no evidence (0), 
under achieved (1), partially achieved (2), or fully achieved (3).  

3.2 Success in the Course 
Although passing a course at university is usually considered as 
receiving a grade of D or better, students who barely pass a course 
with a D letter grade can also benefit from early support and 
intervention in the course. For this course, at least a C grade is 
required to complete the first-year engineering program and 
matriculate to an engineering disciplinary program. In addition, 
most engineering programs have a minimum requirement of 
maintaining a C or better GPA to stay in the program. 
Furthermore, if a student decides to transfer to another school or 
program, she typically needs to pass most of the courses with 
grades of A or B, and sometimes C grades. For these reasons, in 
this study, similar to other studies (e.g., [3]), success was defined 
as earning at least a C grade, which was equivalent to a final grade 
of 68% or higher in the course.  

3.3 Feature Selection 
Three different feature selection methods were used in this study, 
which are described in this section: (1) Correlation: One way to 
select a subset of predicting variables that are more related to the 
predicted variable is by calculating the Pearson correlations 
between them; (2) Gini gain: The second feature selection method 
that was used in this study was the Gini gain method. The goal of 
this method is to calculate how well a variable can divide the 
students into pass or fail categories; (3) Sum of Squared Errors 
(SSE) and explained variance: The third feature selection method 
used in this study was based on calculating the Sum of Squared 
Errors (SSE) and the percentage of variance of the predicted 
variable (pass/fail) explained by the predicting variables in a 
Generalized Linear Model (GLM). Variables that result in lower 
SSE and higher explained variance are better predictors of at-risk 
students in the course.   

4. RESULTS and DISCUSSION
Feature selection methods highlighted learning objectives that are 
good predictors of student success in the course. The top five 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other 
uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029450



learning objectives are shown in Table 1 for the three feature 
selection methods. Correlation and Gini gain resulted in the same 
top four learning objectives. Explained variance had only one 
common variable with Gini gain and two common variables with 
correlation methods.  

All top five learning objectives that were selected by the 
correlation and Gini gain methods were from homework 5. Two 
of the learning objectives from homework 5, HW05-3 (Create a 
user-defined function using rules for writing functions) and 
HW05-4 (Create test cases to evaluate a user-defined function), 
were selected by all three methods. In addition, “professional 
habits” showed up in all three methods (although from two 
different homework assignments, 3 and 5). These results indicated 
that week 5 topic (user-defined functions) is an important topic.  

Table 1. Top five selected learning objectives  

 Learning Objective # of times  in top 5 

C
or

re
la

tio
ns

 

HW05-6 - Professional Habits. 2 
HW05-1 - Construct an appropriate 
function definition. 2 

HW05-3 - Create a user-defined function 
using rules for writing functions. 3 

HW05-4 - Create test cases to evaluate a 
user-defined function. 3 

HW05-2 - Demonstrate how to create a 
MATLAB plot for technical presentation.   2 

G
in

i g
ai

n 

HW05-1 - Construct an appropriate 
function definition. 2 

HW05-6 - Professional Habits. 2 
HW05-3 - Create a user-defined function 
using rules for writing functions. 3 

HW05-2 - Demonstrate how to create a 
MATLAB plot for technical presentation.   2 

HW05-4 - Create test cases to evaluate a 
user-defined function. 3 

Ex
pl

ai
ne

d 
V

ar
ia

nc
e HW05-3 - Create a user-defined function 

using rules for writing functions. 3 

HW03-7 - Professional habits. 1 
HW02-3 - Interpret and evaluate logical 
statements. 1 

HW05-4 - Create test cases to evaluate a 
user-defined function. 3 

HW01-6 - Coding Standards. 1 
 
Figure 1 shows the correlation between academic success in the 
course and the homework learning objectives as well as among 
the learning objectives. The correlation between the homework 
learning objectives and course success increased from homework 
1 to 5. Homework 1 and 2 learning objectives had low correlation 
with success in the course. The correlations of homework 3 
learning objectives with course success were low or moderate. 
Homework 4 learning objectives were split into two categories. 
The first four learning objectives had low correlation with success 
in the course while the last 3 had moderate correlations. 
Homework 5 learning objectives had moderate or good 
correlations with the course success. 

There were two increases in the correlations among the learning 
objectives. First, correlations among learning objectives increased 
during week 4 (from HW04-5). After week 4 learning objectives 
had higher correlations to other learning objectives and course 
success than the first four weeks. Second, the correlations among 

learning objectives increased from week 9. Learning objectives 
from week 9 to 14 had higher correlations than previous weeks. 

All the learning objectives in a homework were correlated to each 
other (typically more than 0.3), with the exception of homework 
1, 4 and 13. A learning objective from homework 1 had very low 
negative correlation with three learning objectives, one from 
homework 2, and two from homework 3. Two of homework 4 
learning objectives not only were not correlated with other 
homework 4 learning objectives but they also had negative 
correlation with homework 3 learning objectives. In addition, one 
learning objective in week 13, had negative correlations to some 
of the other learning objectives. 

These negative correlations among some of learning objectives 
indicates a problem in either defining these learning objectives or 
assessing them. None of the learning objectives in a course should 
have negative correlations with each other. The course instructor 
can use these results to evaluate the learning objectives and how 
they are being assessed in order to improve the course design. 

Figure 1. Correlations between success in the course and 
learning objectives as well as among the learning objectives.  

5. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented the preliminary results of identifying 
important learning objectives in a first-year engineering course. 
The results show how this approach can (1) inform the instructors 
and students about important topics in a course, and (2) be used as 
diagnostic tool to evaluate the learning objectives, assessments, 
and course design. 

6. REFERENCES 
[1] Huang, S., & Fang, N. 2013. Predicting student academic 

performance in an engineering dynamics course: A 
comparison of four types of predictive mathematical models. 
Computers & Education, 61, 133-145. 

[2] White, R. 2012. Predicting likely student performance in a 
first year Science, Technology, Society course. International 
Journal of Innovation and Learning, 12(1), 72 - 84.   

[3] Macfadyen, L. P., & Dawson, S. 2010. Mining LMS data to 
develop an “early warning system” for educators: A proof of 
concept. Computers & Education, 54(2), 588-599. 





