
Analytics Meet Patient Manikins: Challenges in an Authentic 
Small-Group Healthcare Simulation Classroom 

Roberto Martinez-Maldonado1 
Roberto@MartinezMaldonado.net 

Tamara Power2 
Tamara.Power@uts.edu.au 

Carolyn Hayes2 

Carolyn.Hayes@uts.edu.au 

Adrian Abdiprano2 
Adrian.Abdiprano@uts.edu.au 

Tony Vo2 

Huu.Vo@uts.edu.au 

Carmen Axisa2 
Carmen.Axisa@uts.edu.au 

Simon Buckingham Shum1 
Simon.BuckinghamShum@uts.edu.au 

1Connected Intelligence Centre, 2Faculty of Health, University of Technology Sydney, Australia 

ABSTRACT 
Healthcare simulations are hands-on learning experiences aimed at 
allowing students to practice essential skills that they may need 
when working with real patients in clinical workplaces. Some 
clinical classrooms are equipped with patient manikins that can 
respond to actions or that can be programmed to deteriorate over 
time. Students can perform assessments and interventions, and 
enhance their critical thinking and communication skills. There is 
an opportunity to exploit the students’ digital traces that these 
manikins can pervasively capture to make key aspects of the 
learning process visible. The setting can be augmented with sensors 
to capture traces of group interaction. These multimodal data can 
be used to generate visualisations or feedback for students or 
teachers. This paper reports on an authentic classroom study using 
analytics to integrate multimodal data of students’ interactions with 
the manikins and their peers in simulation scenarios. We report on 
the challenges encountered in deploying such analytics ‘in the 
wild’, using an analysis framework that considers the social, 
epistemic and physical dimensions of collocated group activity.  

CCS Concepts 
•  Information systems ???? Information systems applications ???? 

Collaborative and social computing systems and tools  

Keywords 
Classroom, groupwork, multimodal, awareness, face-to-face 

1. INTRODUCTION  
Healthcare clinical simulations are practical learning experiences 
designed to expose students to a comprehensive range of complex 

or typical scenarios that they may encounter in their future 
workplaces or professional situations [6]. Some didactic methods, 
such as Problem-Based Learning [1], have been effectively applied 
in healthcare education in the form of tasks where students engage 
in complex medical scenarios, as well as simulations using 
manikins or actors as patients. Simulation technology is often used 
to assist healthcare training, ranging from very simple (e.g. using 
an orange to practice giving injections) to more sophisticated 
computer-based systems (e.g. fully simulated high fidelity 
manikins or even completely digital patients [16]). Cooper and 
Taqueti [5] have outlined different types of healthcare simulation 
technologies. For example, high fidelity patient manikins are often 
used to simulate medical scenarios in an environment which is safe 
for both learners and patients.  

Simulations in health care are not associated with specific 
technologies. Rather they are learning techniques that substitute or 
magnify real experiences with guided experiences that mimic or 
reproduce key aspects of real world situations [8]. For example, 
students can practice in order to improve: their communication with 
the patient and the healthcare team; their expertise in using specific 
medical equipment; or their procedural knowledge and technique, 
or protocols to be followed under certain circumstances, etc. In this 
way, simulations can equip students with essential practical skills 
that may be called upon during clinical placements in healthcare 
workplaces. Moreover, simulation through scenarios can be an 
effective alternative for the achievement of learning outcomes that 
are typically met using a traditional lecture format [10].  

From the beginning of their degree, healthcare simulations are 
integrated into each semester of the Bachelors of Nursing and 
Midwifery at the University of Technology Sydney (UTS). During 
class, students commonly work in small teams undertaking specific 
roles and responding to hypothetical scenarios. Manikins ranging 
from newborn to adult (e.g. see Figure 1) give students the 
opportunity to practise skills before implementing them in real life 
situations. One of the main challenges that teachers and students 
face in these scenarios is the very limited awareness of the multiple 
co-occurring learning processes in each small group, and the 
limited feedback that the teacher can give to the (20 to 30) students 
in the classroom. These are common problems that emerge in 
several classroom scenarios [15]. As a result, the learning 
experience depends on the quality of reflection in which students 

 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post 
on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
LAK '17, March 13 - 17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027401 

 

             
Figure 1. The healthcare simulation classroom. Left: small group of learners performing a role-based simulation task.  

Center: the classroom setting. Right: a depth sensor tracking learners’ position around a patient manikin in the classroom.  
 



can engage about their own actions and those of others in their 
teams. Typically, however, little evidence is gathered that could 
support in-class debriefing and reflection, besides video recordings 
of the simulation sessions or annotations.  

Our research sits in this space, where clinical simulations and 
learning analytics can be operationalised together to provide better 
feedback to students, and new insights for teachers. There is a 
significant opportunity to use multimodal sensors and analytics to 
make the normally ephemeral embodied activity in simulations 
visible, replayable and referenceable in reflections and analyses by 
students and teachers seeking to improve their practice, and (as in 
this paper) by researchers. Ultimately, the goal is of course 
intensely practical: to make such practices more readily 
improvable. This could be accomplished by enriching simulations 
with multimodal sensors in order to capture traces of the face-to-
face interactions [3]. Possible ways to exploit these multimodal 
data can include the provision of visualisations, notifications or 
feedback to students or the teachers, during or after the simulation 
activity (e.g. [14]). The analysis of students’ data can also involve 
modelling and analytics techniques including the analysis of 
behavioural patterns (e.g. interaction of students with the patient); 
task performance; students’ sequential processes (e.g. [12]); 
communication among students and roles (e.g. [13]); conversation 
patterns (e.g. [2]); space usage (e.g. [16]) and gestures. 

This paper presents a synthesis of conclusions drawn from an 
authentic classroom study aimed at exploring the mechanisms to 
collect and integrate multimodal data about students’ interactions 
with their peers and the manikins to complete simulation scenarios. 
The contributions of the paper are firstly, a discussion of the 
challenges encountered in this initial attempt to bring learning 
analytics into a real health simulation classroom (in contrast to an 
experimental laboratory). Secondly, we present illustrative, 
preliminary examples of the analytics that such sensors make 
possible. We offer these findings to guide other researchers and 
developers seeking to provide support for enhanced awareness, 
provision of feedback or evidence-based reflection in face-to-face 
(f2f) classroom scenarios.  

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section 
presents an overview of related work in the area of learning 
analytics applied to classroom and face-to-face settings. Section 3 
provides details about our healthcare simulation classroom study.  
Section 4 presents a synthesis of conclusions drawn from the study 
and illustrative analytics examples.  The paper concludes in Section 
5 with a discussion of lessons learnt and future work.  

2. RELATED WORK 
The study presented in this paper is relevant for both learning 
analytics efforts on tackling multimodal interaction (e.g. 
employing video, audio and touch sensors to examine learning in a 
realistic, mixed-media learning environment) and those focused on 
understanding collocated learning environments (where learning 
occurs in a physical environment, such as the classroom, where 
students not only interact through learning systems but also face-
to-face). Recent reviews of the state of the art of multimodal 
analytics and learning analytics in collocated environments can be 
found in [3] and [14]  respectively. Both have mostly reported work 
conducted in controlled, experimental conditions, thus much work 
is still needed to bring learning analytics into authentic classrooms. 
Our work addresses this gap by reporting on the challenges 
encountered and the potential of utilising mobility, audio and log 
data towards providing support in a clinical simulation classroom, 
a domain that has not yet been explored by learning analytics 

initiatives. Our work is inspired by similar LA works conducted 
using interactive tabletops and sensors in the classroom to generate 
dashboards for the teacher [14] and produce teaching analytics [15].  

In the domain of clinical simulation, tools based on video playback 
have been developed to aid in debriefing (e.g. [9]) or self-reflection 
(e.g. [4]) after the simulation. Although this can be an effective 
means of feedback and reflection [7], lengthy or unrelated video 
segments can diminish the discussion of key aspects of the 
simulation. As a result, video playback is often not suitable for 
being used in a classroom where time is commonly limited. To our 
knowledge, this work is the first attempt to integrate data from 
simulation experiences, with a number of team activity data 
streams. Bringing learning analytics into this design space may 
provide alternative ways to support debriefing, generate the means 
for providing automated feedback during or after the simulation, or 
to find patterns indicative of collaboration profiles or student 
strategies. 

3. THE STUDY 

3.1 The Learning Situation 
This study was run in authentic laboratory classes taught in 
semester 2, 2016 as part of the undergraduate unit: “Integrated 
Nursing Practice”. This is a final-year subject in the Bachelor of 
Nursing at the University of Technology Sydney. The main 
objective of this unit is to support students to develop clinical 
practice skills and prepare them for entry to the nursing workforce. 
There is a strong f2f component for the unit, including 3-hour 
weekly laboratory classes where students commonly face simulated 
scenarios involving chronic and complex conditions. In total, 580 
students attended these classes. Each had from 20 to 27 students. 
The study focused on the classes conducted in Week 3 of the 
semester. The learning design included a series of tasks to be 
completed by small teams of students using the patient manikins. 
Students had to collaborate and put into practice their theoretical 
knowledge and nursing skills to care for a patient in a clinical 
scenario. The tasks included: assessment of chest pain symptoms, 
administration of medication, management of adverse drug reaction 
and conducting an electrocardiogram (ECG) analysis. Additionally, 
each student was asked to play one of 4 possible roles: a Team 
leader, the Patient, Nurses, and an Observer. The teacher assumed 
the Doctor role. 

3.2 Apparatus and Multimodal Data Sources 
In this study, we focused on 5 randomly selected laboratory classes. 
Only the activity occurring in two of the available five simulated 
hospital beds was recorded in each session to allow students to opt 
out from the data recording. A total of 56 students and 4 different 
teachers were in the observed sessions. The laboratory classrooms 
are equipped with 5 medium fidelity manikins in bed spaces (see 
Figure 1-centre). These manikins generate physiological data and 
can be programmed to improve or deteriorate over time in response 
to nursing actions.  

See Figure 2 for an overview of the bed spaces enhanced with 
sensors, which captured the following data. Some of the physical 
actions performed on the manikin were automatically logged (e.g. 
checking pulse, blood pressure, etc). The SimPad tablet allowed 
students to log the completion of required tasks pre-defined by the 
teacher to form a checklist. Students’ location data was captured 
automatically using a Kinect depth sensor (e.g. see the depth image 
recording overlapped with a snapshot of students’ activity in Figure 
1-right). Directional audio was captured using the microphone 
array (Dev-Audio-Microcone). This captured 6 channels of audio 



input around it. Video of the sessions was also captured using 
cameras and microphones built into the ceiling. Thus, the types of 
data involved in this case were mobility, interaction, self-reported 
activity and communication data.  

4. THEMATIC ANALYSIS 
In order to scaffold the analysis of the data and explore the potential 
and challenges in terms of learning analytics, we used the Activity-
Centred Analysis & Design (ACAD) framework [13]. This 
framework provides a structure for applying different analytical 
tools according to four closely related dimensions of user activity: 
the social, the setting, the epistemic and the runtime dimensions. In 
the following subsections, we present examples of the potential for 
learning analytics and the classroom challenges encountered in this 
initial attempt. We additionally discuss emerging issues in terms of 
data management, ethics and privacy.  

4.1 The social dimension  
Social formations and mobility. The potential: a feasible source of 
student’s behavioural data is the tracked position of the students 
around the manikin, which can provide information about how 
group members approach the tasks, the processes they follow 
before performing actions on the manikin and behaviour according 
to learners’ roles. For example, Figure 3 shows the mobility 
information of two groups in the same session represented as 
heatmaps of location data captured by the depth sensor. These show 
two very distinct approaches to the task. Group A stayed mostly 
away from the patient during the first half of the 
task (see red ovals in quarters Q1 and Q2) to then 
work near the patient only during the third quarter 
of the activity (see blue ovals in Q3). Then, they 
finished earlier than other groups (no data in Q4). 
By contrast, Group B followed a very different 
approach by engaging with the patient from the 
beginning of the task and maintaining proximity 
throughout (see blue ovals in Q1-4). This is a 
preliminary example of how proximity and 
mobility data, when visualised in intuitive ways, 
could provoke productive reflection on the 
different strategies followed by students. It is a 
pedagogical decision exactly how and for what 
purposes one would deploy such visualisations 
with students. 

Challenges: a number of challenges emerged in 
the classroom. For example, solutions to 
identifying people around the bed (see Figure 4-

left, where the teacher is interacting with the manikin but for the 
depth sensor is just another student), or their roles, are still required 
to provide continued tracking even though students’ move away 
from the depth sensor range. Also, since the depth sensor uses a 
computer vision algorithm, problems related with occlusion (e.g. 
students occluding each other or being too close to the sensor) and 
changes in the setting (e.g. students closing the curtains around the 
manikin to perform procedures that required privacy, see Figure 4-
right, tracked in blue) may arise. The potential value of these 
heatmaps of mobility for assessing student’s engagement with the 
manikin and patient centred care is a current key area of work in 
the host university. Still, more work needs to be done to create 
robust and unobtrusive solutions to improve the automated 
generation of this kind of data.   

Audio tracking. The potential: conversation patterns within a group 
can be crucial indicators of effective groups’ strategies, processes 
or performance [2]. By using the mic array, we aimed to track when 
each group member spoke to detect levels of conversation which 
could provide insights at a group level or reveal some of the 
collaboration story. For example, Figure 5 illustrates the potential 
for learning analytics by integrating audio and mobility data for the 
overall activity of Groups A and B. The figure shows the total 
effective time of conversation as detected by the 6-channels of the 
mic array. It can be observed, for example, that most of the talking 
for Group A occurred while students were away from the manikin 
(see left and central sectors of the microphone indicating 12, ~13 
and ~6 minutes of talking corresponding to the clusters of heatmap 
activity further from the patient). By contrast, the talking by Group 
B mostly occurred on both sides of the manikin (see how the high 
heatmap mobility data corresponds to the sectors of the mic array 
that detected more talking: ~17 and ~14 minutes).  

Challenges: even though these visualisations can be generated 
completely automatically, the data used to generate them may have 
included some general classroom noise and voices coming from 
other beds. Isolating students’ voices in the classroom is 
challenging, since it is a very unpredictable and dynamic 
environment. Students move and talk at varied voice levels and 
there are also unexpected noises such as those generated by the 
manikins or medical equipment. Although analytics of student 
formations, mobility and conversation patterns can effectively 
inform collocated collaboration processes, there are still a number 
of challenges to be addressed to get clean data from a laboratory 
classroom environment. 

 
Figure 3. Heatmaps of mobility data during student’s activity (1 hour) divided in 

quarters for two groups of the same classroom session: A and B. Coloured ovals 

mark clusters of activity near (blue) and further (red) from the patient 

 

Figure 2. Simulation manikin enhanced with sensors  



 

     
   Figure 5. Tracking directional audio (blue areas) and 

mobility data (heatmap) for groups A and B 

4.2 The setting dimension 
The potential: although blended learning models are widespread, 
learning analytics have until now focused on the online settings in 
which interaction is mediated by computers, since the data is so 
easily logged. The f2f setting providing the focus for this paper 
seeks to ensure that the co-located elements are no longer invisible, 
but could provide automated feedback in the classroom to improve 
awareness and reflection in blended-learning settings.  

Challenges: unforeseen events can occur in co-located settings. 
Commonly, the teacher adapts the task, social aspects and the 
setting on-the-fly or in design time to accommodate for these 
events. However, these decisions, if not considered in the design, 
may affect the quality of the learning analytics outputs or even limit 
the types of analytics that can be delivered. In the school hosting 
our study, for example, although some manikins are designed for 
students to be able to administer injections and intravenous (IV) 
fluids (which can generate logged events), other mid-fidelity 
manikins do not provide such functionality (thus not generating 
logs). External instruments (such as external IV or ECG devices) 
are also sometimes used by the teaching team to enhance student’s 
experience or augment some manikins lacking of certain 
functionalities. However, they are generally not connected to the 
manikin system and/or do not record activity logs. Thus, there can 

be a trade-off between the setting needs for classroom orchestration 
and learning; and what is feasible to be achieved through learning 
analytics innovations.  

4.3 Epistemic dimension (the task)  
The potential: the possibility of generating visual analytics that 
describe the different steps and key milestones of the collaborative 
learning process within a group of students can provide an effective 
area for discussion, reflection or the provision of more informed 
feedback. For example, Figure 6 (see coloured pins on the blue 
timeline) shows the logs obtained from two groups in two different 
sessions. These correspond to three key actions which are important 
for this specific simulation case: 1) when the first set of vital signs 
of the patient was obtained (red pins), 2) when a prescription 
medication was administered (blue pins) and 3) when an ECG test 
was performed after the patient deteriorated (yellow pins). Whilst 
other actions can also be visualised, these examples indicate how 
the achieved milestones can be helpful for the teacher or the 
students to reflect on the process followed by each group or groups 
in the same classroom.  

Challenges: capturing traces of the task and also making sense of 
this information in order to render it actionable can be very 
challenging. Another epistemic challenge to overcome is the 
impact of the task instructions on the data capture. In our example, 
the teacher encouraged students to self-report their actions on a pre-
formatted checklist on the tablet, (which although a common 
practice for practicing nurses is usually performed on paper). But 
only 3 groups completed the checklist, and one of them did it as 
explicitly requested by the teacher after the session. 

4.4 The runtime enactment of the task 
The potential: there is a growing interest in the learning analytics 
community in connecting the learning design with evidence-based 
data innovations [11] since activity data makes much more sense 
when the activity context is known. However, not much has been 
done to provide analytics for comparing the enactment of the tasks 
in the classroom with the learning design intentions. Figure 6 also 
illustrates the timelines that show how two classroom sessions 
unfolded. In this case, the manikin logs and the mobility data can 
provide evidence about the duration of the simulation session. In 

 
Figure 6. Design analytics for two classroom sessions: showing three key milestones reached by at least 1 group during the 

simulation (obtained from the manikin logs and student’s self-reported events) shown in a timeline that represents the enactment 

of the learning design 

 
Figure 4. Tracking challenges. Left: a small group (3 students and the teacher). Right: a very large group formed by latecomers 

(tracking affected by occlusion and whenever students closed the medical curtains, e.g. see blue shaded area tagged as ‘1’) 



the first class (T1) the teacher took ~45 minutes to provide 
instructions and discuss the case and then ~1.5 hours for the 
reflection after the simulation. By contrast, the second teacher (T2) 
dedicated most of the class to the simulation (almost 2 hours) 
allowing students to perform the actions at a different pace (note 
the separation between the coloured pins in T1 and T2). This type 
of visualisation could be offered to a unit coordinator to fine-tune 
the session design, or to be aware of the variation in execution.  

Challenges: in our study, each of the four teachers enacted the 
learning design quite differently, making an impact on the task and 
therefore on the analytics. However, learning analytics can provide 
insights about how divergent teachers are in enacting the design. 
Overall, unexpected classroom events, besides the ones mentioned 
in previous subsections, strongly influenced or limited our first 
attempt in collecting students’ data for analytics. For example, in 
one of the classes, students arriving late to the class, one by one, 
generated large groups that were quite dysfunctional and also hard 
to track using the depth sensor (see Figure 4, right). 

4.5 Data management and ethics 
Challenges: privacy, consent and data management issues need to 
be taken into consideration for deploying learning analytics in 
authentic educational settings. This is particularly crucial for 
situations where student data cannot be de-identified or which 
involve video/audio recording (as in our case). For example, in our 
study, all students were informed by the lecturer about the study a 
week before the recording sessions. Blanket authorisation was 
granted by the ethics committee of the institution. Then, during the 
study, only two out of the 5 clinical beds were recorded (there were 
always unmonitored beds in each class) allowing students to 
voluntarily participate. Students in this Faculty are already used to 
the occasional recording session being organised as it is a common 
practice in this learning space. As this is more of an exception than 
a commonality in other classrooms, work needs to be done to 
explore sustainable strategies to request consent and clarify data 
management issues without stretching the already very limited 
classroom time. 

5. CONCLUSION 
Learning analytics innovations deployed in authentic physical 
classrooms are still rare. We have presented our initial attempt in 
bringing learning analytics into a healthcare simulation classroom 
aiming to uncover small group learning, collaboration and 
enactment processes. We faced several challenges that still need to 
be addressed in order to start gaining insights about student’s processes. 
Through our illustrative preliminary examples, we uncovered the 
potential that these multimodal analytics can bring to reveal 
different aspects of the collaborative process, classroom dynamics 
and the enactment of the learning design which are commonly 
invisible. Finally, we illustrated the complexity of implementing 
learning analytics in the classroom, not only in terms of limitations 
in the technology, but also because the classroom is a very complex 
and dynamic environment where the epistemic, social and physical 
dimensions play a crucial role in making each session unique and 
filled with unforeseen events. Although the unpredictable nature of 
the classroom may affect learning analytics, it certainly makes a 
classroom a rich setting that offers great opportunities for learning.  

We envisage that this paper can be useful for other researchers and 
developers seeking to provide enhanced support in simulation 
laboratories and also in more generic collocated settings. Our future 
work is aimed at generating the technical and pedagogical means 
for providing automated feedback, and/or supporting awareness 

and reflection in f2f classroom scenarios, similarly to what is 
currently available in computer-mediated (online) platforms. 

6. REFERENCES  
[1] Barrows, H. S. 1996. Problem?based learning in medicine and 

beyond: A brief overview. New directions for teaching and 
learning, 1996, 68, 3-12.  

[2] Bergstrom, T., and Karahalios, K. 2007. Conversation Clock: 
Visualizing audio patterns in co-located groups. In Proc. of 
40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 

Sciences (Big Island, Hawaii, USA, Jan 3-6). IEEE Computer 
Society, 78-87.  

[3] Blikstein, P., and Worsley, M. 2016. Multimodal Learning 
Analytics and Education Data Mining: using computational 
technologies to measure complex learning tasks. Journal of 
Learning Analytics, 3, 2, 220-238.  

[4] Bussard, M. E. 2016. Self-Reflection of Video-Recorded 
High-Fidelity Simulations and Development of Clinical 
Judgment. Journal of Nursing Education, 55, 9, 522-527.  

[5] Cooper, J., and Taqueti, V. 2008. A brief history of the 
development of mannequin simulators for clinical education 
and training. Postgraduate medical journal, 84, 997, 563-570.  

[6] Dieckmann, P. 2009. Using simulations for education, training 
and research: Pabst Science Publishers. 

[7] Fanning, R. M., and Gaba, D. M. 2007. The role of debriefing 
in simulation-based learning. Simulation in healthcare, 2, 2, 
115-125.  

[8] Gaba, D. M. 2004. The future vision of simulation in health 
care. Quality and safety in Health care, 13, suppl 1, i2-i10.  

[9] Grant, J. S., Moss, J., Epps, C., and Watts, P. 2010. Using 
video-facilitated feedback to improve student performance 
following high-fidelity simulation. Clinical Simulation in 
Nursing, 6, 5, e177-e184.  

[10] LeFlore, J. L., Anderson, M., Zielke, M. A., Nelson, K. A., 
Thomas, P. E., Hardee, G., and John, L. D. 2012. Can a virtual 
patient trainer teach student nurses how to save lives—teaching 
nursing students about pediatric respiratory diseases. 
Simulation in Healthcare, 7, 1, 10-17.  

[11] Lockyer, L., Heathcote, E., and Dawson, S. 2013. Informing 
pedagogical action: Aligning learning analytics with learning 
design. American Behavioral Scientist, 57, 10, 1439-1459.  

[12] Martinez-Maldonado, R., Dimitriadis, Y., Martinez-Monés, 
A., Kay, J., and Yacef, K. 2013. Capturing and analyzing verbal 
and physical collaborative learning interactions at an enriched 
interactive tabletop. International Journal of Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning, 8, 4 (Nov. 2013), 455-485.  

[13] Martinez-Maldonado, R., Goodyear, P., Kay, J., Thompson, 
K., and Carvalho, L. 2016. An Actionable Approach to 
Understand Group Experience in Complex, Multi-surface 
Spaces. In Proc. of CHI' 16 (San Jose, USA, May 7-12). NY: 
ACM, 2062-2074. 

[14] Martinez-Maldonado, R., Schneider, B., Charleer, S., Shum, 
S. B., Klerkx, J., and Duval, E. 2016. Interactive Surfaces and 
Learning Analytics: Data, Orchestration Aspects, Pedagogical 
Uses and Challenges. In Proc. of LAK' 16 (Edinburgh, UK, 
April 25-29). NY: ACM, 124-133  

[15] Prieto, L. P., Sharma, K., Dillenbourg, P., and Jesús, M. 
2016. Teaching analytics: towards automatic extraction of 
orchestration graphs using wearable sensors. In Proc. of LAK' 
16 (Edinburgh, UK, April 25-29). 148-157. 

[16] von Zadow, U., Buron, S., Harms, T., Behringer, F., 
Sostmann, K., and Dachselt, R. 2013. SimMed: combining 
simulation and interactive tabletops for medical education. In 
Proc. of CHI' 13. NY: ACM, 1469-1478. 



