
Exploring the Measurement of Collaborative Problem 
Solving Using a Human-Agent Educational Game 

Kristin Stoeffler 
ACT, Inc. 

500 ACT Dr. 
Iowa City, IA 52240 

1-319-337-1000 
Kristin.Stoeffler@act.org 

Yigal Rosen 
Harvard University 
125 Mt. Auburn St. 

Cambridge, MA 01451 
1-781-707-6517 

Yigal_Rosen@harvard.edu 

Alina von Davier 
ACT, Inc. 

500 ACT Dr. 
Iowa City, IA 52240 

1-319-337-1000 
Alina.vonDavier@act.org 

 
ABSTRACT 
Collaborative problem solving (CPS) is a process that relies on both 
cognitive and social skills contributions by those involved in the 
joint activity. If a student is matched with a problematic group 
of peers, then there will be no valid measurement of the CPS 
skills. In the human-agent settings, CPS skills are measured by 
pairing each individual student with a computer agent or agents that 
can be programmed to act as team members with varying 
characteristics relevant to different CPS skills and contexts. This 
paper describes current research on measuring CPS skills through 
human-agent interactions in a prototype of a collaborative 
educational game. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
K.3.1. Computers and Education: Computer Use in Education 
H.5.m. Information Inferences and Presentation 

Keywords 
Collaborative Problem Solving; Performance Assessment; 
Computer agent; Teamwork 

1. INTRODUCTION  
Collaborative problem solving (CPS) is a critical competency for 
college and career readiness [9].  Measurement of such varied skills 
presents challenges for assessment and education professionals, but 
also new opportunities [13]. CPS requires the ability to recognize 
the points of view of other persons in a group; to contribute 
knowledge, experience, and expertise in a constructive way; to 
identify the need for contributions and how to manage them; to 
recognize the structures and procedures involved in resolving a 
problem; and as a member of the group, to build and develop group 
knowledge and understanding [4] [8]. Collaboration on tasks 
enables individuals to communicate about problem situations, join 
their perspectives and skills, and solve tasks that are difficult or 
impossible to achieve individually. Measurement of such varied 
skills presents challenges for assessment and education 
professionals, but also new opportunities. This project focuses on 
CPS performance assessment, which is part of ACT’s Holistic 
Framework— outlined by Camera, et al. [3] as a comprehensive 
description of the knowledge and skills individuals need to know 

and be able to do to succeed at school and at work. The skills 
required to effectively combine problem solving, and behavioral 
strategies to successfully solve a problem within a team context are 
outlined in the CPS and includes 18 facets related to the construct. 
We chose five of these facets for exploration and prototyping. 
The innovation of the prototype resides in designing an interactive 
educational game according to a comprehensive framework for 
assessing and teaching difficult-to-measure skills, the CPS. Our 
learning outcome was to explore the feasibility of measuring these 
skills in an interactive and engaging way that will eventually allow 
for the ability to provide insights and feedback to participants and 
teachers via a dashboard model. To this end, multidisciplinary 
teams collaborated to design, develop, and deploy a video game for 
middle school students and later to adults.  
 

 
Figure 1. “Circuit Runner” Game User Interface 

2. COLLABORATIVE GAME WITH 
AGENT 

In the collaborative game, Circuit Runner, a student navigates a 
circuit board maze and interacts with a student “bot,” or computer 
agent, to solve a number of challenges presented at locked gates. 
Varying levels of collaborative behaviors, communication, and 
problem solving skills are required to successfully navigate the 
challenges and unlock the gates (see Figure 1). Previous research 
findings [9] support the design decision to use a human-agent 
versus a human-human mode allowed for the student to interact 
with a computer agent with the predetermined ability to express a 
larger range of the CPS skills identified as valuable. The human-
agent mode has been shown to allow students to demonstrate a 
“significantly higher level of performance” of CPS skills and 
outperform students experiencing the human-human mode [9]. In 
part this may be due to the valuable role of conflict in eliciting an 
extended range of CPS skills as identified by Mitchell [7], 
Scardamalia [10], Stahl [11], and Weinberger [12]. These skills 

 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.  
LAK’17, March 13–17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright © 2017 ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029464 



might be missed in a human-human mode that cannot guarantee 
that such conflict will be present.  
 

 

Figure 2. Game Clusters Based on Dialog Response Data 

3. STUDY I: EXPLORING FEASIBILITY 
Over 350 students between the ages of 11 and 14 have played the 
game. The game was also accompanied by a set of game usability 
and research survey questions. The results include multiple 
clustering analyses of the evidence provided over a series of game 
plays based on common practices for exploratory analytics outlined 
by Bauckhage, et al. [2] and Kerr, et al. [4]. In Figure 1, we show a 
view of the clusters derived from a K-Means (K=8) analysis over 
normalized skill score dimensions. Each dot within the inner 
column represents a game instance skill score for three of the skill 
categories: Engagement (EN), Finding Information (FI) and 
Monitoring Understanding (MU). The outermost column/ dot color 
encoding represents a unique clustering of game scores. A black 
line denotes the mean value. This analysis provides an overall 
labeling of game performance and can also be used to perform 
queries/comparisons between games/players, e.g. select K nearest 
neighbor (K-NN) [1] associations of games/players. In addition to 
this we also performed a Mixture Model clustering of Gaussians, a 
process outlined by McLachlan, et al. [6], that makes soft 
assignments of game evidence to clusters. This yields a probability 
result for each game to a particular category/cluster group (see 
Figure 2).  

4. STUDY II: FULL-SCALE 
DEPLOYMENT 

Our current research effort is focused on expanding the range of 
CPS skills measured to include additional problem solving and 

behavioral components in the context of workplace (adults). We are 
also exploring cross-validation with other CPS measures, as well as 
applying machine learning algorithms that will allow a discovery 
of new connections and player clusters between response data and 
game telemetry. 
For our poster session we will review game features designed to 
elicit evidence of CPS skills in adults, insights gleaned from the 
design and development processes of human-agent interactions, as 
well as discuss preliminary findings. 

5. ADDITIONAL AUTHORS 
Additional authors: Amit Agrawal (ACT, Inc., email: 
Amit.Agrawal@act.org) 

6. REFERENCES 
[1] Arya, Sunil, et al. An Optimal Algorithm for Approximate 

Nearest Neighbor Searching Fixed Dimensions. Journal of 
the ACM (JACM) 45.6 (1998): 891-923. 

[2] Bauckhage, Christian, Anders Drachen, and Rafet Sifa. 
"Clustering Game Behavior Data." IEEE Transactions on 
Computational Intelligence and AI in Games 7.3 (2015): 
266-278. 

[3] Camara W, O'Connor R, Mattern K, Hanson MA. Beyond 
Academics: A Holistic Framework for Enhancing Education 
and Workplace Success. ACT Research Report Series. 2015 
(4). ACT, Inc. 

[4] Kerr, Deirdre, and Gregory KWK Chung. "Identifying Key 
Features of Student Performance in Educational Video 
Games and Simulations Through Cluster Analysis." JEDM-
Journal of Educational Data Mining 4.1 (2012): 144-182. 

[5] McLachlan, G.J. and Basford, K.E., 1988. Mixture models: 
Inference and applications to clustering (Vol. 84). Marcel 
Dekker.  

[6] Mitchell R, Nicholas S. Knowledge creation in groups: The 
value of cognitive diversity, transactive memory and open 
mindedness norms. Electronic Journal of Knowledge 
Management. 2006;4(1):67-74. 

[7] OECD (2013). PISA 2015 Collaborative problem solving 
framework. OECD Publishing. 

[8] Rosen Y. Computer-based assessment of collaborative 
problem solving: Exploring the feasibility of human-to-agent 
approach. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in 
Education. 2015 Sep 1;25(3):380-406 

[9] Scardamalia M. Collective cognitive responsibility for the 
advancement of knowledge. Liberal education in a 
knowledge society. 2002 Jun 28;97:67-98. 

[10] Stahl G. (2006) Group Cognition: Computer Support for 
Building Collaborative Knowledge (Acting with 
Technology).  

[11] Weinberger A, Fischer F. A framework to analyze 
argumentative knowledge construction in computer-
supported collaborative learning. Computers & education. 
2006 Jan 31;46(1):71-95. 

[12] Von Davier, A. A., & Halpin, P. F. (2013). Collaborative 
problem solving and the assessment of cognitive skills: 
Psychometric considerations. ETS Research Report Series, 
2013(2), 1-36

 



