
Cultural Considerations in Learning Analytics 
Ravi Vatrapu 

Computational Social Science Laboratory (CSSL) 
Department of IT Management 
Copenhagen Business School 

vatrapu@cbs.dk

ABSTRACT 
This paper discusses empirical findings demonstrating cultural 
influences in social behavior, communication, cognition, 
technology enhanced learning and draws implications for learning 
analytics. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.3 Group and Organization Interfaces: Theory and models,
Asynchronous interaction Collaborative computing,
Evaluation/methodology; H.1.2 User/Machine Systems: Software 
Psychology.

General Terms
Design, Human Factors, Theory 

Keywords
Learning analytics, online learning culture, behavior, 
communication, cognition, computers, human-computer 
interaction (HCI).General Terms 

1. INTRODUCTION
According to George Siemens, “learning analytics is the use of 
intelligent data, learner-produced data, and analysis models to 
discover information and social connections, and to predict and 
advise on learning.”1 The LAK 2011 conference call for papers 
defines learning analytics as “the measurement, collection, 
analysis and reporting of data about learners and their contexts, for 
purposes of understanding and optimizing learning and the 
environments in which it occurs.” This paper presents empirical 
findings demonstrating cultural influences in social behavior, 
communication, cognition, technology enhanced learning and 
draws implications for learning analytics. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
presents prior empirical work documenting cultural influences in 
online learning settings. Section 3 first presents cultural 

                                                                 
1 http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/2010/08/25/what-are-learning-

analytics

differences in teaching and learning in formal classroom settings, 
communication styles and cognitive processes and then discusses 
the implications for online learning and learning analytics. Section 
4 concludes the paper with the identification of several challenges 
and directions for future work. 

2. CULTURE: CONCEPT, HISTORY, AND 
DEFINITIONS  
The concept of culture has a checkered intellectual history. 
Raymond Williams [45] has termed culture “one of the two or 
three most complicated words in the English language” (p.87). 
Williams attributes this complexity of the concept to its 
complicated historical development in many European languages 
and its subsequent adoption in to a plurality of academic 
disciplines. Further complications with the concept of culture arise 
from the slippage of meaning between the academic usages of the 
term and the popular usages of the term like in “high culture” vs. 
“pop culture”. As the ever eloquent Williams [44, p. 11] puts it 
“the concept at once fuses and confuses the radically different 
experiences and tendencies of its formation.” The Victorian 
Ethnologist, Edward Tylor, is widely credited for providing the 
first definition of culture in anthropology. According to Tylor, 
“culture or civilization, taken in its wide ethnographic sense, is 
that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, 
law, custom, and other capabilities and habits acquired by man as 
a member of society” [38, p. 64].  A compiled list of over 200 
different definitions of culture can be found in Kroeber and 
Kluckhohn’s [23] critical review of the concept of culture. Table 
2.1, generated from Kroeber and Kluckhohn’s [23], summarizes 
the different analytical emphases of different definitions of 
culture. 

Table 1. Definition groups of the concept of culture [23] 
Culture Definitions Definition Emphasis 
Descriptive  “Enumeration of content” (p.81) 

Historical “Social heritage or tradition” (p.89) 

Normative “Rule or way” (p.95) 

Psychological “Culture as a problem solving device” 
(p.105) 

Structural “Patterning or organization of culture” 
(p.118) 

Genetic “Culture as a product or artifact” (p.125) 

Tracing the intellectual evolution of notion of culture from the 
German “kultur” and its tensions with the notion of civilization, 
Kroeber and Kluckhohn [23] categorize the different definitions of 
cultures into 6 groups: descriptive, historical, normative, 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
LAK’11, February 27-March 1, 2011, Banff, AB, Canada. 
Copyright 2011 ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-1057-4/11/02…$10.00. 

127



psychological, structural and genetic. To this grouping of 
definitions of culture, it is fruitful to add notions of culture as 
identity and also generative notions of culture. The psychological 
definitions of culture have “emphasis on adjustment, on culture as 
a problem-solving device” [23, p. 105] and also have an emphasis 
on culture as learning. Two other definitions of culture are listed 
below:

Culture is learned and shared human patterns or 
models for living; day-to-day living patterns. 
These patterns and models pervade all aspects of 
human social interaction. Culture is mankind's 
primary adaptive mechanism [7, p. 367]. 
Culture is the shared knowledge and schemes 
created by a set of people for perceiving, 
interpreting, expressing, and responding to the 
social realities around them [24, p. 9]. 

In the above two definitions, culture is defined as patterns or 
schemas. Culture is shared and is a factor in an individual’s social 
interactions. The definitions also emphasize the adaptiveness 
implicit in the notion of culture and the importance of culture as 
an active notion and not a passive one. Culture conceived of as 
adaptations to the environmental demands towards some 
instrumental ends has been a feature of cultural ecology strands of 
anthropology. For example, according to White [43, p.339], “all 
life is a struggle for free energy” and culture is a means in that 
struggle toward the ends of survival. As Redfield [33] defines it: 
“culture is the shared understandings manifest in act and artifact” 
[Cited by Triandis, H. in the Foreword to 18]. 

2.1 Definition of Culture
This paper uses the following definition of culture: 

“the collective programming of the mind which 
distinguishes the members of one group or 
category of people from another” [17, p. 5].  

The emphasis in Hofstede’s definition is that culture is learnt in 
nurture and not inherited by human nature. The “collective 
programming of the mind” highlights culture as a collective 
activity that is to be conceived as a dynamic process rather than a 
passive state. The other part of the definition “which distinguishes 
the members of one group or category of people from another” 
points out the individual and group identity formation and 
sustenance aspects of enculturation in social institutions like 
family, school and work. Culture comes from a perceived 
similarity of individuals within a cohort group (be it a linguistic 
community, an ethnic group or a scientific community) and in that 
sense it is collective. This similarity is not intended to be exact; 
neither does it imply essentialist homogeneity. In a multicultural 
society, culture is about a collective particularity.  
Hofstede [17, p.18] relates “collective programming” to 
Bourdieu’s [1] notion of “habitus”. As mentioned earlier, 
Hofstede’s definition is interpreted in this paper from the 
Vygotskian socio-cultural perspective of the “social formation of 
the mind” [42]. “Collective programming” is not to be understood 
as an external imposition but an active social and ecological 
composition in which the particular individual plays the 
protagonist. Taken together, “social formation” and “collective 
programming” of the mind indicate a cognitive schema.  
Cognitive sciences have highlighted the role of scripts and 
schemas and models in the mundane activities of everyday life 

[35]. In this paper, culture is conceptualized in the cognitive 
scientific sense of a cultural schema. Cultural schemas are putative 
structures; they are properties of an individual’s mind. Cultural 
schemas are not things; neither are they substances. Cultural 
schemas are the historical products of the processes of collective 
programming of the mind. Thus cultural schemas are properties of 
an individual’s biography. This biography includes the interactive 
effects of the geography of that individual’s upbringing (ecology)
and the formative experiences of the collective programming of 
the mind (history). Cultural schemas are etic categories (scientific 
constructs) of cognitive analysis and not emic conceptions 
(experiential) of individual subjective experience [see 15 for more 
on the emic vs. etic distinction and also a defense of his 
positivistic cultural materialism].  
In the next three sections, three separate lines of empirical findings 
from the fields of social behavior, communication and cognition 
are presented and implications for online learning are discussed.  

3. CULTURE AND BEHAVIOR 
Cultural models can be used to identify the differences in cultures 
that affect the computer supported collaborative learning 
environments. There are two kinds of cultural models: models that 
use typologies and models that use dimensions. Typologies 
describe a number of ideal types each easy to imagine. 
Dimensional models group together a number of phenomena in a 
society that were empirically found to occur in combination into 
dimensions. Typologies are difficult to adopt in empirical research 
as real cases very rarely correspond to one single ideal type.  

3.1 Hofstede’s Cultural Dimensions Model 
Hofstede’s seminal work on cultures in organizations formulated a 
framework of four dimensions of culture identified across nations. 
Each dimension groups together phenomena in a society that were 
empirically found to occur in combination. In this section, 
Hofstede’s definitions for these original four cultural dimensions 
are listed followed by a discussion of each dimension with respect 
to online learning. Hofstede’s cultural dimensions model indicates 
what reactions are likely and understandable given one’s cultural 
background.

3.2 Low Power Distance vs. High Power 
Distance
Power distance is the “extent to which the less powerful members 
of institutions and organizations within a country expect and 
accept the power that is distributed unequally” [17, p.28]. People 
in large power distance cultures are much more comfortable with a 
larger power/status differential than small power distance cultures. 
Table 2.1, adapted from Hofstede [16, p. 313], outlines the effects 
of power dimension that have implications for online learning 
environments. It is important to note that Hofstede’s conception of 
power distance is not a bi-directional one; it is conceived as a 
subordinate’s expectation and acceptance of unequal distributions 
of power in a social setting. 
If online education is offered as an alternative to traditional 
schooling then it is important to investigate how students perceive 
the social affordances of the virtual learning institutions. In the 
context of collaborative problem solving, students co-constructing 
concept maps are provided information attributed to scientists who 
have authority by virtue of their expertise and experience. 
Arguments from authority are valued in the scientific enterprise if 
those authorities themselves adhere to the scientific method. The 
point here is not whether the issues of power distance will show 

128



up in online classrooms but rather how does this dimension help 
understand the interactional behavior in an online learning setting. 
Table 2. Power distance dimension in traditional classrooms 
Small Power Distance 

Societies 
Large Power Distance 
Societies 

Student-centered education  
(premium on initiative) 

Teacher-centered education  
(premium on order) 

Teacher expects students to 
initiate communication 

Students expect teacher to 
initiate communication 

Students may speak up in 
spontaneously in class 

Students speak up in class only 
when invited by the teacher 

Students allowed to contradict 
or criticize teacher 

Teacher is never contradicted 
nor publicly criticized 

Effectiveness of learning 
related to amount of two-way 
communication in class 

Effectiveness of learning 
related to excellence of the 
teacher 

Outside class, teachers are 
treated as equals 

Respect for teachers is also 
shown outside class 

Power distance becomes an important dimension to consider in 
collaborative problem solving involving students from lower and 
higher ends of the relatively ordered dimensional scale. 
Collaborative learning does away with the traditional instructional 
role of a teacher. Collaborative learning replaces the teacher-
student dyad with a student-student dyad, replacing a didactic 
pedagogical approach with a social constructivist one. In the case 
of high power distance cultures, this reconfiguration in learning 
results in a replacement of the more hierarchical power structures 
with flatter ones. Do students take advantage of this in an online 
learning setting? From a cognitive standpoint, it is interesting to 
investigate how “cultural schemas” adapt in this reconfigured 
learning setting. For example, what would be the role of 
confirmation bias in problem solving in intercultural collaborative 
learning environments? Do students from high power distance 
cultures conform to the expert opinion even in cases where it 
explicitly contradicts the available evidence? What role does the 
collaborative other play in these learning interactions? These are a 
few of the questions that become relevant when the power 
distance dimension is considered in intercultural online learning 
settings.

3.3 Individualism vs. Collectivism 
“Individualism pertains to societies in which the ties between 
individuals are loose: every one is expected to look after himself 
or herself and his or her immediate family. Collectivism as its 
opposite pertains to societies in which people from birth onwards 
are integrated into strong, cohesive in-groups, which throughout 
people’s lifetime continue to protect them in exchange for 
unquestioning loyalty” [17, p.51]. This dimension describes the 
degree to which a culture emphasizes an individual’s reliance on 
the self or the group. Table 2.2, adapted from Hofstede [16, p. 
312], outlines the effects this dimension that have implications to 
online environments.  
This dimension is of particular interest to the social constructivist 
theories of learning given the small group size emphasis. In inter-
cultural online learning groups, dynamics of in-group and out-
group memberships might affect how certain technology 
affordances are appropriated as social affordances. They might 

also affect the perception of other students in the online learning 
environment. The notion of face-saving is of important when it 
comes to subjective perceptions and evaluation of the user 
interface, online interaction and instructional elements of an online 
course.
Based on socio–cognitive conflict theory [28], collaborative 
learning effectiveness is thought to be influenced by the extent 
that students jointly identify and discuss conflicts in their 
knowledge beliefs [4]. This works well in an individualist culture 
but in collectivist cultures consensual forms of intersubjective 
meaning making processes may be more prevalent.  

Table 3. Collectivism vs. individualism dimension in 
traditional classrooms 

Collectivist Societies Individualist Societies 
Students expect to learn how to 
do

Students expect to learn how to 
learn  

Individual students will only 
speak up in class when called 
upon personally by the teacher  

Individual students will speak 
up in class in response to a 
general invitation by the 
teacher 

Individuals will only speak up 
in small groups  

Individuals will speak up in 
large groups 

Large classes split socially into 
smaller cohesive subgroups 
based on particularistic criteria  
(e.g. ethnic affiliation)  

Sub-groupings in class vary 
from one situation to the next 
based on universalistic criteria  
(e.g. the task "at hand") 

Formal harmony in learning 
situations should be maintained 
at all times  

Confrontation in learning 
situations can be salutary; 
conflicts can be brought into 
the open 

Neither the teacher nor any 
student should ever be made to 
lose face 

Face-consciousness is weak 

3.4 Femininity vs. Masculinity 
“Masculinity pertains to societies in which the gender roles are 
clearly distinct; femininity pertains to societies in which the 
gender roles overlap” [17, p. 82]. This dimension refers to 
expected gender based division of labor in a culture. The cultures 
that score towards what Hofstede refers to, in a confusing choice 
of category labels, as "masculine" tend to have very distinct 
expectations of male and female roles in society. The more 
"feminine" cultures have a greater ambiguity in what is expected 
of each gender. Table 2.3, adapted from Hofstede [16, p. 315], 
summarizes the implications of this dimension for online learning 
environments.
Collaborative learning is often distinguished from cooperative 
learning by the argument that collaboration involves joint activity 
or an effort to maintain a joint conception [34] whereas 
cooperation involves a mere joining of individual activities [10]. 
Collaboration is often conceived of as being beyond a basic 
division of labor and more of an enterprise involving parties with 
equal stakes. 

129



Table 4. Femininity vs. masculinity dimension in traditional 
classrooms 

Feminine Societies Masculine Societies 
Teachers avoid openly praising 
students

Teachers openly praise good 
students

Teachers use average student 
as the norm  

Teachers use best students as 
the norm 

System rewards students' social 
adaptation  

System rewards students' 
academic performance 

Students practice mutual 
solidarity  

Students compete with each 
other in class 

Students try to behave 
modestly 

Students try to make 
themselves visible 

3.5 High Uncertainty Avoidance vs. Low 
Uncertainty Avoidance 
“The extent to which the members of the culture feel threatened by 
uncertain or unknown situations”[17, p. 113]. This dimension 
refers to how comfortable people feel towards ambiguity. Low 
uncertainty avoidance cultures feel much more comfortable with 
the unknown. High uncertainty avoidance cultures prefer formal 
rules and any uncertainty can express itself in higher anxiety. 
Table 2.4, adapted from Hofstede [16, p. 314], summarizes the 
effects this dimension that have implications to online learning 
environments.

Table 5. Uncertainty avoidance dimension in traditional 
classrooms 

Weak Uncertainty 
Avoidance Societies 

Strong Uncertainty 
Avoidance Societies 

Students feel comfortable in 
unstructured learning 
situations: vague objectives, 
broad assignments, no 
timetables  

Students feel comfortable in 
structured learning situations: 
precise objectives, detailed 
assignments, strict timetables 

Teachers are allowed to say "I 
don't know"  

Teachers are expected to have 
all the answers 

Students are rewarded for 
innovative approaches to 
problem solving 

Students are rewarded for 
accuracy in problem-solving 

Teachers are expected to 
suppress emotions
(and so are students)  

Teacher are allowed to behave 
emotionally
 (and so are students) 

Teachers interpret intellectual 
disagreement as a stimulating 
exercise 

Teachers interpret intellectual 
disagreement as personal 
disloyalty 

The dimension of uncertainty avoidance can affect how students 
perceive social affordances of the online learning environment. 
Also of importance are the effects of culture on the interpretation 
or an acknowledgement of the ambiguous data and judgment of 
the relevance of data in the unfolding interactional sequence.  

4. CULTURE AND COMMUNICATION 
Besides Hofstede’s cultural dimensions model the dimension of 
“low-context” vs. “high-context” cultures introduced by Hall [14] 
are important in the contexts and situations of intercultural 
communication. According to Hall [14], in high-context cultures, 

usually the cultures with high power distance, a member needs to 
be explicitly asked to respond to elicit behavior that is a deviation 
from the norm. Table 2.5 lists patterns of Hall’s cultural 
communication context dimension. Hall characterizes speaking as 
an art in high-context cultures, with an emphasis on the emotional 
aspect. High-context cultures privilege social motivation. In low-
context cultures, by contrast, members expect to influence others 
to act by explicitly pointing out pertinent information. The 
information provided implicitly enables the communicating other 
to take the desirable decision. Low-context cultures privilege 
rational information.  
Table 6: Low-context vs. high-context cultural communication 

styles 
High-context communication Low-context communication 
Communication is aimed at 
emotions and rhetorical 
persuasion

Communicative focus is 
rational information 

Speech is unhurried and long, 
as persuasion takes time 

Information is desired in 
quantity and expected to be 
delivered at once  

The main emphasis is not laid 
on the transmission of 
information, as most of it lies 
in the context 

Decisions are taken on the 
basis of information 

Both speaking and listening 
are something to be 
thoroughly enjoyed 

Speaker errors carry social 
costs as they blur information 

 Ambiguous interpretation is 
allowed 

Unequivocal Interpretation is 
desired 

If the communicative context varies across cultures than it 
becomes a variable of interest in the learners’ interactional 
accomplishment of problem solving.  

5. CILTURE AND COGNITION 
According to Nisbett and Norenzayan [30, p. 1], mainstream 
psychology in general had made four basic assumptions about 
cognition. Adapting from them, the four foundational 
psychological assumptions regarding human cognition are:  

? Universality: Basic cognitive processes of sensation, 
perception, attention and memory are universal. In other 
words, basic cognitive processes are invariant across cultures 
and communities. 

? Content Independence: Basic cognitive processes are 
invariant across contents. In other words, cultural differences 
in content do not affect the nature and structure of the basic 
cognitive processes.  

? Environmental-Sufficiency: Cognitive processes of general 
learning and interference operate upon environmental 
contents to equip the child for functional survival. The 
environment provides content to cognitive processes without 
the need for cultural or social interventions. In other words, 
cultural differences in cognitive processes are due to different 
environmental influences and not social influences. 

? Infinite Cultural Variance: Since the universal basic 
cognitive substrate is content independent and 
environmentally-sufficient, the range of cultures is a function 
of the variance in environmental conditions. In other words, 

130



cognition places no constraints on the possible evolutionary 
design space of cultures. 

All in all, these four assumptions have led to a belief in a 
fundamental dissociation between cognition and culture. One 
consequence of this was that psychology and anthropology 
evolved into independent academic disciplines with mostly non-
overlapping research agendas. However there were some 
exceptions to this dualist view of cognition and culture. These 
exceptions include in psychology, Lev Vygotsky and colleagues 
[40, see 42 for a biographical and historical treatment of this 
influential research movement]. In cognitive anthropology, most 
notably D'Andrade [6]; and in cognitive sociology, Dimaggio [11]. 
Recent empirical results have shown that culture and cognition are 
mutually implicated and are not disassociated as traditional 
psychology has postulated.  

5.1 Nisbett and Colleagues’ Cross-Cultural 
Psychology Findings 
Richard Nisbett and colleagues have embarked upon an 
experimental cross-cultural psychology research program to 
systematically investigate cognitive differences across cultures. 
Table 2.6, compiled from Nisbett [29, pp.xix, 44-45] and Nisbett 
and Norenzayan [30, pp. 21-25], presents a concise summary of 
above discussion along with empirical evidence from the 
literature.  
The cultural difference in attention to field vs. object is highly 
relevant to collaborative “knowledge map” learning environments. 
East-Asian learners might pay attention to a meaningful group of 
interrelated knowledge map objects whereas Western learners 
might attend to individual objects and evidential relational links. 
The cultural difference in attention can vary the ways in which 
referencing and deixis are carried out in collaborative discourse. 
East-Asian learners might make more references to regions of the 
concept maps and groups of related concept map objects (i.e., to 
fields of interest), whereas Western learners might reference 
individual objects in their collaborative discourse. This translates 
into a socio-technical design hypothesis that given the choice of 
referencing regions of concept map areas and individual objects in 
the concept map, East Asian learners will appropriate the 
affordances for referencing fields. On the other hand, Western 
learners will appropriate the affordances for referencing individual 
objects.
The implications from the cultural difference in perception is that 
Western learners by virtue of being more susceptible to “primacy 
effect” might favor earlier perceptions of information related to a 
collaborative learning task. East-Asian learners might perceive 
more relationships between the information in concept map and 
instructional materials leading to a greater number of evidential 
relation links in the concept map.  
The cultural difference in causal inferencing processes implies that 
East Asian learners might be more inclined to reason-giving that 
prioritizes situational factors when compared to the dispositional 
attributions of Western learners. One particular implication would 
be the cultural effect on collaborative argumentation. Also, East-
Asian learners’ perception of their collaborative partners might 
follow this same trajectory. This might manifest as East-Asians’ 
giving higher ratings for their collaborative peers due to situational 
attributions explaining any perceived unpleasant “performance.” 
Western learners might perceive their collaborative peers for their 
dispositional “competence.” This cultural difference in cognitive 
processes might manifest as East-Asian learners preferring a 
highly inclusive final conclusion in intercultural collaborative 

problem solving tasks. Western learners might argue for more 
differentiated analytical hypothesis that seems logically the most 
viable.

Table 7. Cognitive differences between East-Asians and 
Westerners 

Cultural
Profile

 Cognitive 
Process 

Westerners East-Asians Empirical 
Evidence 

Attention Object 
Westerners tend 
to attend to 
individual
objects in the 
perceptual field 

Field
East-Asians 
tend to attend 
to whole fields 
rather than 
individual
objects

[25]

Field 
Dependence
[46]

Perception Object-oriented 

Westerners have 
lesser difficulty 
in detaching 
objects from 
their perceptual 
contextual fields 

Relation-
oriented 

East-Asians 
have difficulty 
in
disentangling
an object from 
its perceptual 
surroundings

[20]

[26]  

Causal
Inference

Dispositional

Westerners
susceptible to 
overlooking of 
situational 
factors on 
observed
behavior 

Situational 

East-Asians 
susceptible to 
“hind-sight
bias”  

[32]

[2]

Knowledge
Organization 

Categorical

Reliance on 
categories of 
objects/events 

Relational

Reliance on 
relationships
between 
events/objects 

[3]

Reasoning Analytical 

Application of 
formal logical 
rules and 
analytical 
procedures that 
emphasize non-
contradiction in 
hypothesis 

Holistic 

Willingness to 
simultaneously 
entertain 
several 
contradicting 
hypotheses  

[31]

[30]

131



6. CULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY 
ENHANCED LEARNING  
Vatrapu [39] found that despite differences between American and 
Chinese cultural group participants on (a) how they used the tools 
and resources of the learning environment (appropriation of 
affordances) and (b) how they related to each other during and 
after their collaborative learning interactions (technological 
Intersubjectivity),  there were no significant individual learning 
outcomes differences. Kim and Bonk [9] report cross-cultural 
differences in online collaborative behaviors of the US, Finnish 
and Korean participants in their study. Daniels, Berglund and 
Petre [8] found cultural differences in international projects in 
undergraduate CS education. McLoughlin [27] based on her 
experiences with developing web-based instruction for Australian 
Indigenous education calls for a culturally responsive technology. 
Iivonen, Sonnenwald, Parma, and Poole-Kober [19] found 
culturally influenced differences in language and communication 
styles in a library and information studies course taught over the 
Internet in Finland and US. Walton and Vukovic‘s [41] work with 
south African students from disadvantaged backgrounds found 
that cultural differences make it difficult for the students to make 
the transition to the web use. Crump [5] explored the effects of 
computing learning environment on the newly arriving 
international students at universities in New Zealand. The author 
reports that the cooperative and collaborative learning 
environment was an issue of concern to the students. The author 
says it is likely due to the oversimplification of social structure of 
groups, individual and group goals and the diverse nature of 
knowledge construction in the collaborative learning 
environments. Duncker [12] conducted an ethnography of the 
usability of a library metaphor used in digital libraries in the 
cultural context of the Maori who are the indigenous population of 
New Zealand. Duncker says that metaphors and metaphorical 
thinking are strongly rooted in culture. The Maori found the digital 
libraries interesting but difficult to use due to the breakdown of the 
library metaphor caused by a number of cultural misfits. Keller, 
Pérez-Quiñones and Vatrapu [22] outlined cultural issues and 
opportunities in computer science education. 

7. DISCUSSION   
Taking the existing body of research on cultural effects on social 
behavior, cognitive processes, online pedagogies and HCI, 
learning analytics should consider both appropriation of 
affordances (tool use) as well as technological intersubjectivity  
(how learners and teachers relate to, interact with, and form 
impressions of each other in technology enhanced teaching and 
learning settings). Given that both seminal networked learning 
research (Hiltz, 1994) and current online learning best practices 
prescriptions (Moore, 2006) emphasize student collaboration, and 
since these aspects vary across cultures in traditional classroom 
settings (Hofstede, 1986) as well as online learning settings 
(Edmundson, 2007), learning analytics should critically examine 
mono-cultural design assumptions. Learning environments and 
learning analytics solutions that do not incorporate diverse 
“alternates for action” might not achieve the best results in terms 
of student learning processes, outcomes and satisfaction. 
In order to exhaustively study the potential effects of culture on 
the appropriation of potentials for action and the negotiation of the 
meaning of those actions, one needs to analyze individual actions 
in the context of their interactional sequences [21]. Therefore, 
learning analytics tools should support micro-genetic analysis of 

learners’ interactions apart from aggregating behavioral outcomes 
for statistical testing.  
Although the cognitive embeddedness of discourse and 
knowledge-building have been theorized and empirically 
evaluated [36, 37], social engagement and cultural embeddedness 
aspects of these design implementations have remained 
unexamined so far. Learning analytics designers need to consider 
ways of facilitating the varying degrees of social and cognitive 
embeddedness. Increasingly, issues are being identified in the 
cross-cultural implementation of online learning or e-learning 
systems which are primarily designed, developed, and evaluated in 
North America and/or Western Europe contexts [13]. To help 
remedy this situation, future work could investigate three models 
of cultural influence in online learning and learning analytics: (1) 
culture-specific, (2) culture-comparative, and (3) culture-
interactional. Culture-specific work studies learning analytics in a 
specific cultural context where learners have a shared sense of 
identity. Culture-comparative studies investigate learning analytics 
processes and products across cultures. In culture-interactional 
studies, learning analytics in intercultural settings is the primary 
focus.

8. ACKNOWLGEMENT  
The presentation of this paper was supported by the Comparative 
Informatics networking grant under the Second International 
Network Programme of the Danish Ministry of Science, Technology 
and Innovation. 

9. REFERENCES 
[1]  Bourdieu, P. Structures, Habitus, and Practices. Cambridge 

University Press, City, 1977. 
[2]  Choi, I. and Nisbett, R. Situational Salience and Cultural 

Differences in the Correspondence Bias and Actor-Observer 
Bias. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 9 1998), 
949. 

[3]  Choi, I., Nisbett, R. and Smith, E. Culture, category salience, 
and inductive reasoning. Cognition, 65, 1 1997), 15-32. 

[4]  Constantino-González, M. and Suthers, D. A Coached 
Collaborative Learning Environment for Entity-Relationship 
Modeling. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems2000), 324-333. 

[5]  Crump, B. J. New Arrival students: mitigating factors on the 
culture of the computing learning environment. Proceedings of 
the sixth conference on Australian computing education - 
Volume 302004), 49 - 56. 

[6]  D'Andrade, R. G. The Development of Cognitive 
Anthropology. Cambridge University Press, New York, 1995. 

[7]  Damen, L. Culture Learning: The Fifth Dimension on the 
Language Classroom1987), Page 367. 

[8]  Daniels, M., Berglund, A. and Petre, M. Reflections on 
International Projects in Undergraduate CS Education. 
Computer Science Education, 9, 3 1999), 256-267. 

[9]  Davison, R. Technical opinion: Cultural complications of 
ERP. Communications of the ACM, 45, 7 2002), 109 - 111. 

[10]  Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A. and O’Malley, C. The 
evolution of research on collaborative learning. Learning in 
Humans and Machines1995), 189-205. 

[11]  Dimaggio, P. Culture and Cognition. Annual Review of 
Sociology, 231997), 263-287. 

132



[12]  Duncker, E. Digital library communities and change: Cross-
cultural usability of the library metaphor. Proceedings of the 
second ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital 
libraries2002), Pages: 223 - 230. 

[13]  Edmundson, A. Globalized E-learning Cultural Challenges.
Information Science Publishing, City, 2007. 

[14]  Hall, E. Beyond Culture. Anchor Press, New York, 1976. 
[15]  Harris, M. The Epistemology of Cultural Materialism. From 

Cultural Materialism: The Struggle for a Science of Culture. 
AltaMira Press. Broadview Press, City, 1998/1966. 

[16]  Hofstede, G. Cultural Differences in Teaching and Learning. 
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 10, 3 1986), 
301-320. 

[17]  Hofstede, G. Cultures and Organizations: Software of the 
Mind, Intercultural Cooperation and its Importance for 
Survival. McGraw-Hill, 1997. 

[18]  House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P. W. and 
Gupta, V. Culture, Leadership and Organizations: The 
GLOBE study of 62 societies. Sage Publications, Newbury 
Park, CA, 2004. 

[19]  Iivonen, M., Sonnenwald, D. H., Parma, M. and Poole-Kober, 
E. Analyzing and understanding cultural differences: 
Experiences from education in library and information studies. 
,. City, 1998. 

[20]  Ji, L., Peng, K. and Nisbett, R. Culture, control, and perception 
of relationships in the environment. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 78, 5 2000), 943-955. 

[21]  Jordan, B. and Henderson, A. Interaction Analysis: 
Foundations and Practice. The Journal of the Learning 
Sciences, 4, 1 1995), 39-103. 

[22]  Keller, B., Pérez-Quiñones, M. A. and Vatrapu, R. Cultural
Issues and Opportunities in Computing Education. City, 2006. 

[23]  Kroeber, A. L. and Kluckhohn, C. Culture: A Critical Review 
of Concepts and Definitions. Harvard University Peabody 
Museum of American Archeology and Ethnology, 1952. 

[24]  Lederach, J. P. Preparing for peace: Conflict Transformation 
Across Cultures. Syracuse University Press, Syracuse, NY, 
1995. 

[25]  Masuda, T. and Nisbett, R. Attending holistically versus 
analytically: Comparing the context sensitivity of Japanese 
and Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
81, 5 2001), 922–934. 

[26]  Masuda, T. and Nisbett, R. Culture and change blindness. 
Cognitive Science, 302006), 1-19. 

[27]  McLoughlin, C. Culturally Responsive Technology Use: 
Developing An On-Line Community Of Learners. British
Journal of Educational Technology, 30, 3 1999), 231-243. 

[28]  Mugny, G. and Doise, W. Socio-cognitive conflict and 
structure of individual and collective performances. European 
Journal of Social Psychology, 8, 2 1978), 181-192. 

[29]  Nisbett, R. The Geography of Thought: How Asians and 
Westerners think differently . . . and Why. Free Press, New 
York, 2003. 

[30]  Nisbett, R. and Norenzayan, A. Culture and Cognition. City, 
2002. 

[31]  Nisbett, R., Peng, K., Choi, I. and Norenzayan, A. Culture and 
systems of thought: Holistic versus analytic cognition. 
Psychological Review, 108, 2 2001), 291-310. 

[32]  Norenzayan, A. and Nisbett, R. Culture and Causal Cognition. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 4 2000), 132-
135. 

[33]  Redfield, R. Introduction to Malinowski, B. Magic, science 
and religion. Beacon Press, Boston, 1948. 

[34]  Roschelle, J. and Teasley, S. The construction of shared 
knowledge in collaborative problem solving. Springer-Verlag, 
City, 1995. 

[35]  Sternberg, R. J. Cognitive Psychology. Wadsworth, 2006. 
[36]  Suthers, D., Vatrapu, R., Medina, R., Joseph, S. and Dwyer, N. 

Beyond Threaded Discussion: Representational Guidance in 
Asynchronous Collaborative Learning Environments. 
Computers and Education, 50, 4 2008), 1103-1127. 

[37]  Suthers, D. V., R;Joseph, S, Dwyer, N. and Medina, R. 
Representational Effects in Asynchronous Collaboration: A 
Research Paradigm and Initial Analysis. Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE), City, 2006. 

[38]  Tylor, E., B Primitive Culture: The Science of Culture.
McGraw-Hill, City, 1903/1988. 

[39]  Vatrapu, R. Cultural Considerations in Computer Supported 
Collaborative Learning. Research and Practice in Technology 
Enhanced Learning, 3, 2 2008), 159-201. 

[40]  Vygotsky, L. Mind in society. Harvard University Press, 
1930/1980. 

[41]  Walton, M. and Vukovic, V. HCI in the developing world: 
Cultures, literacy, and the web: dimensions of information 
"scent". interactions, 10, 2 2003), 64 - 71. 

[42]  Wertsch, J. Vygotsky and the social formation of mind.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1985. 

[43]  White, L. A. Energy and the evolution of culture.  American 
Anthropologist. Reprinted. Mayfield Pub. Co, City, 
1943/1996. 

[44]  Williams, R. Marxism and literature. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1977. 

[45]  Williams, R. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society.
Oxford University Press, New York, 1983. 

[46]  Witkin, H. A. and Goodenough, D. Field dependence and 
interpersonal behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 84, 4 1977), 
661-689. 

133



