
Formative Assessment Method of Real-world Learning
by Integrating Heterogeneous Elements of Behavior,

Knowledge, and the Environment

Masaya Okada
Graduate School of Informatics,

Shizuoka University
3-5-1 Jyohoku, Naka-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka,

Japan
m.okada@acm.org

Masahiro Tada
ATR Intelligent Robotics and Communication

Laboratories
2-2-2 Hikaridai, Keihanna Science City, Kyoto,

Japan
mtada@atr.jp

ABSTRACT
Real-world learning in a field is an important educational area for
experience-based activities. Formative assessment by constant mon-
itoring of the intellectual achievement of real-world learners is es-
sential for adaptive learning support, but no assessment methodol-
ogy has yet been developed. We consider a method to systemati-
cally integrate heterogeneous factors of real-world learning: learn-
ers’ internal situations, their external situations, and their learning
field. Then, we propose a method for formatively assessing the
situation of real-world learning. The method enables us to recog-
nize the sequence of characteristic stay behavior and the associated
body posture of a learner, and to estimate the 3D location of his/her
interest. The method enables the estimation of not only the learn-
ing topic that a learner is currently examining in a field but also the
prospective topics that he/she should learn. Our assessment method
is the basis for context-aware support to promote the emergence of
new knowledge from intellectual collaboration in the world.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: Collaborative learning

General Terms
Design; Experimentation; Human Factors; Measurement; Verifica-
tion

Keywords
Real-world learning; formative assessment; context estimation; spa-
tial information distribution; multimodal sensing

1. INTRODUCTION
Traditional educational practices are often conducted in many schools
[1, 19], but as another aspect of learning, recent research on edu-
cational support also acknowledges that out-of-school learning by
interaction and physical experiences in the world is an important

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
LAK’14, March 24 - 28 2014, Indianapolis, IN, USA
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2664-3/14/03...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567574.2567579

Figure 1: Environmental learning in a natural field. A typical
example of experience-based and out-of-school learning.

educational area, since knowledge is discovered not only from text-
books in a classroom [2, 10]. This paper calls experience-based and
out-of-school learning “real-world learning”. A typical example of
real-world learning is environmental learning in nature for discov-
ering forest ecology [12]. Figure 1 shows one of our field practices
of environmental learning. In contrast with classroom learners in a
fixed setting, real-world learners behave in a physical field (e.g., a
natural environment) without restriction of movement, and so it is
hard for educators to observe and assess all situations of real-world
learning. A methodology for constantly monitoring and assessing
intellectual activities in the world is essential for heightening the
effects of real-world learning.

Mobile or ubiquitous computing technologies are rapidly advanc-
ing, and new analytics realized with these technologies have the
power to innovate real-world learning (e.g., support adaptive to the
situation of a learner in the world). With the use of small computer
devices and wearable or ubiquitous sensors, we propose a method
of ubiquitous and multimodal sensing for assessing the situation
of how intellectual collaboration (e.g., learner-learner interaction
in a group and learner-environment interaction) proceeds through
autonomous and bottom-up learning in the world.

1.1 Designing Autonomous Bottom-up
Learning in the World

Traditional education in a classroom usually predefines what and
how a learner should learn [1, 19]. This is because a cognitive
architecture has traditionally been considered to be a closed process

1



Strange but  interesting objects exist.
What are these? 
For what purpose do these exist here?

Information access behavior

Action

Manipulation
Information 

acquisition

Learner

Real world

Distribution of information 

      (i.e., knowledge seeds) A place with discovery knowledge

Zooming

Figure 2: Learning through interaction with the world.

for forming a structured internal representation of the cognition of
a person. Such a traditional learning design encourages learners to
follow educators’ predefined scenarios to acquire knowledge [1].
This is a top-down approach driven by educators.

In contrast, the theory of situated cognition gives a foundation of
real-world learning and suggests a bottom-up approach driven by
each learner. Situated cognition explains that a learner situated in
real situations in the world can often make the bottom-up acqui-
sition of knowledge that can be practically used in a society [2,
10]. This theory, which postulates that a learner’s cognitive pro-
cess is embedded in the world, proposes a cognitive architecture
for acquiring knowledge through human interaction with the world
[2, 10]. People generally have different viewpoints, and the diver-
sity of knowledge emerges through the autonomous and bottom-up
process of learning when learners interact with the world, com-
municate with each other, and decide what and how they investi-
gate. Navigating learners by providing predefined knowledge in
a specific field (e.g., navigating visitors at a museum to observe
and study objects in an art exhibition [3]) is a well-known work-
able approach, but its position seems closer to traditional top-down
approaches. Our challenge is designing and creating a new learner-
centered environment for promoting discovery learning through au-
tonomous bottom-up knowledge acquisition in the world.

1.2 Formative Assessment of Real-world
Learning

It is generally known that the effect of educational support is achieved
when it is properly delivered to learners according to their intellec-
tual state (e.g., the level of understanding and interest). Therefore,
it is fundamental to develop a method for formative assessment of
learning by constantly monitoring learner activities and evaluating
the intellectual situation of each learner at a given time. For ex-
ample, a mini paper test in a classroom is often used to assess
top-down knowledge. System use logs, test results, and reports
are used for assessment by learning management systems (LMS)
in a classroom [17]. Recent studies have attempted to estimate
the affects (e.g., boredom, confusion, delight, or frustration) of
classroom learners from sensor data (e.g., data from a fixed video
camera, a pressure-sensitive mouse, and a pressure-sensitive chair)
[6, 8]. However, designing a learner-centered environment for au-
tonomous bottom-up learning in the world is a new challenge in the
field of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL), and so
far the methodology to assess such real-world learning has not been
well investigated.

The first difficulty is that the effects of autonomous bottom-up learn-
ing cannot be measured by comparing learners’ achievements with
predefined answers, which is the method of testing the effects of

Interest-level learning

(finding and examining knowledge seeds)

Knowledge-level 

learning

(germinating knowledge seeds)

Preparatory-level learning

(exploring nature, but not finding any information)

level

Figure 3: Learning levels about finding and interpreting infor-
mation in the world.

top-down education. The second difficulty is that the effects of
real-world learning are derived from an outdoor experience that
a learner autonomously obtains by dynamically interacting in and
with the world. In other words, no methodology has been proposed
to assess knowledge that comes from the interaction between learn-
ers and the environment, and to carry out a real-time evaluation of
the state of intellectual collaboration that changes from moment to
moment in the world.

1.3 Research Objective
Our research objective is to evaluate the performance of individual
learners participating in collaboration activities in the real world.
It is expected that the effects of bottom-up knowledge creation by
learners are heightened if we can dynamically provide each real-
world learner with dedicated context-aware support that is tailored
to his/her state of collaboration. Context estimation (e.g., place of
interest, learning topics, unachieved knowledge, and tendency of
viewpoint) of a real-world learner is conventionally an unsolved
issue. We consider this issue in this study so that we can create
a learner-centered environment for strengthening and enhancing a
learner’s interest and viewpoint and for promoting effective learner-
learner interaction and learner-environment interaction. Thus, we
propose a new method to systematically grasp the human-world
dynamics through which intelligence emerges and to formatively
assess the situation of a real-world learner at a given time.

The type of learning considered in this paper is exploratory learn-
ing in which individuals in an environment interact and collabo-
rate with their surroundings and achieve knowledge. Since human-
world interaction is the essential key to directly cause learning ef-
fects, our method mainly focuses on improving the human-world
interaction of each individual learner. Our method is a basic assess-
ment method for realizing computer-based support for exploratory
learning that is interactively and collaboratively made between peo-
ple and the world, and is an important contribution in the field of
new analytics enhanced with mobile and ubiquitous computing.

2. ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK
As stated above, an approach for estimating the situation of a real-
world learner at a given time has not been well researched. Conse-
quently, the first argument we have to make concerns the distinctive
characteristics of real-world learning. As shown in Figure 2, real-
world learning is driven by field activities for searching and dis-
covering physical “information” existing in the world [14]. Such
real-world information can be regarded as a knowledge seed [14].
A learner visits a certain location in the world and explores and
searches for information as the stage of preparatory-level learning

2



prior knowledge

stable

stay

Estimation by signal processing

Estimation by information integration

2D

location

head

posture

body

posture

LPS

place of

interest

barometer

learning

topic

acceler

-ometer
gyroscope

Usage as context information

Intellectual states

GPS

Adaptive and context-aware learning support

unachieved

knowledge

spatial

characteristics 

of information

Low-level sensing

Physical  situation

tendency of

viewpoint

Component 1

Component 2

Component 3

2D locating

behavior

Information access behavior

3D focusing

behavior

probing

behavior

Recognition by machine learning algorithm Content and process of 

internal situation

activity

map

field

notes
audio-visual 

recorder

Knowledge 

sensing

Experience

capture

interest 

acquisition

knowledge

acquisition

learning

achievements

enencecece

Local Positioning System (LPS) 

Hybrid motion sensor
   

Wearable camera & microphone

Microphone

Eye cameraData 

storage

LPS
GPS 

receiver

Example of wearable-type

sensor sets

a 3-axis accelerometer,

a 3-axis gyroscope,

and a barometer

Figure 4: Method for assessing the situation of intellectual ac-
tivities in the world.

(Figure 3). When the learner finds information of his/her interest,
this learner starts interest-level learning to examine the nature of the
information. Interest-level learning can trigger higher knowledge-
level learning (Figure 3). When he/she successfully examines and
interprets the information, knowledge is then constructed by the
learner as a mental model of the environment functions [14]. When
the learner fails in the examination or interpretation of the informa-
tion, he/she cannot achieve knowledge.

Real-world learners use their body to interact with their surround-
ings and to obtain information in the world. A real-world learner’s
body functions as a sensor for obtaining information about the real
world and also functions as an actuator for manipulating the world
(Figure 2). We focus on both “the role of the real world” (viewpoint
1) and “the behavior of a learner in the world” (viewpoint 2).

Viewpoint 1. The role of the real world
What a learner can learn in the world depends on what infor-
mation is embedded around his/her location. Some locations
in a learning field have valuable observation targets, but some
locations do not. If we know the spatial characteristics of a
learning field, in other words, if we know what intellectual
activities are drawn out at each location in the field, we can
narrow down the learning situation that can occur at each lo-
cation. Thus, we need to develop a technique for extracting
the spatial characteristics of a real-world learning field.

Viewpoint 2. The behavior of a learner in the world
What a learner can learn in the world depends on his/her be-
havior, as well as his/her surrounding information. For ex-
ample, Figure 2 shows a location with discovery knowledge,
where strange but interesting objects (e.g., aerial roots of a
plant) exist on the ground. Just visiting this location without
sufficient observation is not enough for a learner to discover
the nature of the strange objects, and so appropriate behavior

becomes indispensable. A real-world learner interacts with
the world, selects from a range of possible actions, and then
executes an action. The final output of thinking is behavior,
and the intellectual state of a real-world learner is to some
extent physically reflected by their body. It is not possible to
directly observe the internal state of the learner’s brain, but
his/her physical interaction with the world can be observed
from outside, and the differences of behavior can be a clue to
understanding learning situations. For understanding a learn-
ing situation, we need to develop a technology to grasp a
learner’s body-based behavior for accessing the information
embedded in the world.

The central topic discussed in this paper is how we can systemat-
ically integrate the elements of knowledge, behavior, and the en-
vironment for assessing real-world learners’ situations. This is an
issue of finding a way to combine heterogeneous factors: learners’
internal situations, their external situations, and their real-world
learning field. Here, we consider the following three requirements
for assessing real-world learning situations. Requirements 1, 2, and
3 were developed as components 1, 2, and 3 of our assessment
method, respectively (Figure 4).

Requirement 1. Development of an externalization method of
interests and knowledge to grasp the internal situation
It is necessary to develop a method that encourages each
learner to externalize new information and knowledge gained
as the result of real-world learning, and to show the process
and contents of internal intellectual activities (e.g., thinking
and knowledge acquisition). With such a method, it is nec-
essary to quantitatively and qualitatively analyze the intel-
lectual process of how each intellectual activity draws out
intellectual achievements (e.g., a hypothesis, a question, or a
discovery) from each learner. Then, it is necessary to extract
the spatial relationship of how information and knowledge
that a learner can obtain in the world are related to the envi-
ronment where he/she exists. In this research, requirement 1
was satisfied by developing component 1 with the technique
of knowledge externalization with a semantic network, ex-
perience capturing with wearable audio-visual sensors, and a
spatial analysis.

Requirement 2. Development of a sensing method of time-series
behavior to grasp the external situation
It is necessary to have a detailed understanding of the phe-
nomena occurring in a learning field. The differences of be-
havior observable from outside a learner can be a clue to un-
derstanding learning situations. Thus, we need to investigate
how learning behavior is related to the intellectual situation,
and we need to find what learning behavior is displayed dur-
ing a certain learning situation of real-world learning. We
need to watch every behavior of a learner to trace the entire
time series of a learner’s physical behavior in accessing in-
formation in the world. In this research, requirement 2 was
satisfied by developing component 2 through behavior sens-
ing by multimodal motion sensors and recognizing behavior
by signal processing and machine learning.

Requirement 3. Development of a spatial integration method
of internal and external situations
Evaluations of both the learners’ internal and external situ-
ations are qualitatively different, and can complementarily
explain a phenomenon in a learning field. Thus, it is nec-
essary to integrate these two evaluation results and to form

3



an understanding of how knowledge, behavior, and the envi-
ronment are related. For example, it is necessary to spatially
summarize the situation of past intellectual activities (e.g.,
acquisition of interests and knowledge) in the world to make
a spatial pattern of knowledge acquisition activities, and to
extract the spatial characteristics of how information is dis-
tributed in a learning field. Then, it is necessary to under-
stand the state of real-world learning at a high level of ab-
straction (e.g., topics of interest, unachieved knowledge, and
tendency of viewpoints). The various context information es-
timated by our method acts as the core for realizing context-
aware learning support adapted to the interest, knowledge,
and viewpoint of each learner. In this research, requirement
3 was satisfied by developing component 3 with information
integration techniques.

The rapid progress being made in engineering technologies has
led to new ways of innovating learning support. Our intention is
not to select engineering technologies that fit conventional method-
ologies, nor to replace old educational tools with new ones. Our
method is for educators and system designers who want to design
and create an effective methodology of future learning support that
can be embodied only by using the innovations of computational
devices and sensing technologies in a real-world environment.

3. STRUCTURING 3D INFORMATION
DISTRIBUTION

As component 1, we developed a technology to observe the inter-
est and the knowledge that a learner obtains in a field and used this
technology to consider the spatial structure of information distribu-
tion in a real-world learning field.

3.1 Capturing and Analyzing Real-world
Learning Experiences

To model the role of a real-world learning field, we developed a
technique to grasp the process and contents of information acquisi-
tion and knowledge acquisition. In our example of outdoor learn-
ing, each learner is equipped with a wearable camera (on his/her
head) and a microphone (at his/her mouth) to record his/her vision
and utterances (Figure 4). This makes it possible to know exactly
where the learners are looking and finding or not finding real-world
information. The learners’ behavior and communication are also
recorded with video cameras operated or set by the observers. Dur-
ing outdoor learning, each learner is asked to take field notes of
what he/she is interested in so that we can grasp the information
found by each group.

Among the various definitions of knowledge, we consider knowl-
edge acquisition as structuring the internal representation of a se-
mantic network between different concepts (information) [14]. A
conventional concept map [13] is widely used for structuring peo-
ple’s knowledge, but when we used it for our research purposes, we
found that a conventional concept map was hard to use for distin-
guishing newly acquired knowledge from a learner’s background
knowledge and for clearly identifying the contents and process of
real-world learning [14]. Thus, we improved the knowledge repre-
sentation of a conventional concept map by developing an activity
map to objectively externalize the content and process of his/her
knowledge acquisition [14].

Immediately after the outdoor learning, each learner is requested to
draw an activity map (Figure 5) to express the semantic structure of

Attribute information of

knowledge or an activity

Attributes:

- example

- general knowledge

- question

- hypothesis

- observation

- verification

- discovery

(defined from 90 learners’ experiments)

Figure 5: Activity map with semantic network.

the information and knowledge that he/she newly acquired by the
outdoor learning [14]. A node in an activity map is used to write
information that a learner found. Each arc is used to express the
semantic relationship between information that the learner found.
Unlike a conventional concept map [13], a node and an arc in an ac-
tivity map can be expressed with a single word or phrase in natural
language. Moreover, we examined field notes written by 90 learn-
ers in our past experiments and designed attribute information that
identified the activity from which a learner found the relationship
[14]. The attribute information can be added to each arc and con-
sists of the following: example of a concept, general knowledge (a
learner’s background knowledge), question, hypothesis to explain
the relationship between concepts, observation of a phenomenon in
the world carefully watched for a period of time, verification (be-
havior to examine and verify the hypothesis), and discovery. The
granularity of each attribute information was set at a level that the
learners were able to consistently judge. We used free software1 to
draw an activity map.

A learner’s field notes show his/her interests, and the activity map
of the learner shows the knowledge that he/she acquired. We syn-
chronously replay all multiview audio-visual records (e.g., from
learners’ wearable cameras and microphones, and experimenters’
hand-held cameras) to correlate the topic and level of intellectual
activity at each time point with the results of the learners’ knowl-
edge externalization. When the content that a learner deals with at
a certain point of time is what he/she externalized in his/her field
notes, the learning at this time point is regarded as “learning con-
tributing to obtaining real-world information” or “learning for ex-
amining the nature of real-world information” (i.e., interest-level
learning; Figure 3). Similarly, when the content is properly exter-
nalized in the learner’s activity map, the learning at this time point
is regarded as “learning contributing to constructing understanding
by interpreting real-world information” or “learning for examin-
ing newly constructed knowledge” (i.e., knowledge-level learning;
Figure 3). When the content does not meet the requirements of
interest-level learning or knowledge-level learning, the learning at
this time point is regarded as preparatory-level learning (Figure 3).

3.2 2D Dependence of Learning Topics
1Reflective mapper “Ando-Kun”, http://www2.kobe-u.ac.
jp/~inagakis/undo.html

4



Figure 6: 3D change of learners’ postures according to learning
topics being considered.

We conducted experiments with 15 learners in Kamigamo Exper-
imental Forest, Kyoto University in 2010 and investigated the re-
lationship between learning topics and locations by dividing the
experimental field (130 x 50 m) into 80 regions (10 x 10 m grid)
in a two-dimensional (2D) plane. These learners had not visited
our experimental field beforehand and so did not have any prior
knowledge of the field.

We determined the learning topics examined by the learners by cap-
turing and analyzing learning experiences, as described in the pre-
vious section. The learners considered various topics (142 topics
total), but the learning topics tended to depend on the learner’s lo-
cation. On average, each topic was considered in 1.71 regions, and
2.16 topics were considered per region. “What is learned in a field”
is closely related to “the position of the learner,” which illustrates
the uniqueness of the physical information in each region. These
experiments confirmed that the range of learning topics can be nar-
rowed down based on the 2D location.

3.3 3D Existence of Real-world Information
The learning topics that can be examined are region dependent.
Thus, 2D positional information limits the range of the situation
of the learner and narrows down possible learning topics that can
be examined at his/her location. However, in regions where more
than one learning topic exists, 2D location information is insuf-
ficient to uniquely identify the topic of interest that a learner is
examining. Therefore, additional information is required to deter-
mine the learner context. We note that a natural ecosystem gener-
ally has a multi-layered hierarchy. As shown in Figure 6, learners
behave differently even if they stay in the same location. They
sometimes look up and sometimes crouch down, and their posture
changes according to the learning topics that they are considering.
We therefore performed a 3D classification of the learning topics to
be learned in the experiment. We found the tendency that the top-
ics were not only region dependent in 2D but also height dependent,
and were related to the following three layers:

(1) Upper layer: Objects above the level of the learners’ heads
(e.g., tall trees, branches and leaves, and light sources). The learn-
ing topics related to this layer are usually examined when a learner
is looking up.

(2) Middle layer: Objects at eye level (e.g., tree trunks and shrubs).
The learning topics related to this layer are usually examined when
a learner is looking straight ahead.

(3) Lower layer: Objects at ground level (e.g., mushrooms, moss,
soil, undergrowth, aerial roots, mountain streams, and ponds). The
learning topics related to this layer are usually examined when a
learner is looking down or crouching down.

What a learner examines depends on the 2D region, and each 2D
region offers only a small number of topics. Moreover, this re-
search also found that each layer of an ecosystem contains different
information, and height is therefore another factor influencing the
knowledge that a learner can acquire. Even if more than one topic
occurs in the same region, we found that height information is use-
ful for distinguishing such topics. If the learning topics cannot be
distinguished in a 2D space, it is possible to distinguish them in a
higher 3D space.

4. 3D ESTIMATION OF INFORMATION
ACCESS BEHAVIOR

As component 2, we developed sensing technologies to determine
the time series of learning that occurs in the world. These technolo-
gies recognize a learner’s 3D behavior for accessing and acquiring
information embedded in the world.

4.1 Estimating Time-series Probing Behavior
4.1.1 Probing Behavior

Two types of behavior can be found in environmental learning: be-
havior effective for learning, and behavior ineffective for learning
[12, 15]. Behavior effective for learning includes observation (e.g.,
visual inspection and examination by touch), knowledge exchange
(e.g., cooperative thinking and discussion), and intellectual investi-
gation (e.g., cooperative thinking and discussion through a collab-
orative field survey). This type of behavior, which accesses and ac-
quires real-world information, is called “probing behavior” in this
paper. As discussed, probing behavior at each time point is at one
of the three levels about how a learner is finding and interpreting
information in the world (Figure 3). On the other hand, behavior
ineffective for learning includes trivial chat, idle talk, lack of ob-
servation, lack of conversation, and rest. This paper calls this type
of behavior “non-probing behavior”.

4.1.2 Relationship between Intellectual Situations
and Behavior

Although human behavior can be estimated from sensor data [9,
11, 21, 22], it is conventionally difficult to estimate the intellec-
tual state of a learner by using sensors. To begin with, sensors are
devices for measuring physical quantities (e.g., velocity, acceler-
ation, angular velocity, and signal strength) associated with body
movement. A typical example of behavior sensing is identifying
the location of humans at a given time [21]. Other examples in-
clude recognition of daily activities (e.g., walking and ascending
stairs) [11], and abnormal activities (e.g., slipping on a wet floor)
[22]. This has recently been extended to the ability to sense human
activities by using consumer devices such as mobile phones [9].
However, few studies have attempted to determine the relationship
between the physical behavior and the intellectual state of humans.
Hence, even if we measure real-world activities using sensors, it
is quite difficult to infer the internal intellectual state of the learner.
Thus, we conducted field surveys to investigate how intellectual sit-
uations are accompanied by physical behavior in the world. Then,
we obtained the following significant results [15].

(1) When learners walk inattentively in an environment, they rarely
have enthusiastic discussions and obtain only superficial informa-
tion about the environment.

(2) When learners engage in probing behavior (e.g., observation,
knowledge exchange, and intellectual investigation), they display

5



a characteristic physical motion. We call this motion stable stay.
Stable stay is defined as a condition that extends for Tt [sec] or
more, during which a fixed body posture is adopted (horizontal an-
gular rotation of T? [deg/sec] or less) and movement is restricted
to a velocity of Tv [m/sec] or less. Stable stay includes the state of
crouching down.

(3) When learners are not focused on a specific learning topic and
casually look around, their body orientation in the horizontal plane
is not fixed, even if they are not walking.

4.1.3 Recognizing Probing Behavior by Sensing
Stable Stay

Learners exhibit a wide variety of behaviors, such as looking at
various parts of the environment, touching objects at various points
with their hands, and observing objects while crouching down. How-
ever, whatever each learner actually notices, observes, or investi-
gates, stable stay is commonly displayed when probing behavior
is performed. In fact, under stable stay conditions, the possibility
that probing behavior occurred was found to be 3.12 times higher
than that under other conditions [15]. This is an important finding
concerning the common structure of diverse learning activities.

On the premise that probing behavior and stable stay conditions
frequently co-occur [15], each learner was given a wearable local
positioning system (LPS, 255 g, 111 x 82 x 39 mm; Figure 4) to
be placed on their lower back in order to capture the local move-
ment and body orientation of the learner. The time series of probing
behavior was determined by detecting stable stay conditions from
the LPS data with three threshold parameters (Tt = 15.00 [sec], Tv
= 0.10 [m/sec], T? = 60.00 [deg/sec]). These values were deter-
mined by pre-evaluating sensor data for experimental learners and
inspecting the data distribution of physical movements associated
with both probing behavior and non-probing behavior. The data
for these learners were not used in the subsequent experiments for
evaluating the recognition accuracy.

We carefully specified the contents and levels of learning at a cer-
tain time point by referring to multiview audio-visual records (e.g.,
from learners’ wearable cameras and microphones, and from ex-
perimenters’ hand-held cameras) and made the ground-truth data of
the series occurrence of learning activities (time precision: second
order). Then, we evaluated the accuracy of the recognition tech-
nology by using the ground-truth data for the time series of stable
stay and probing behavior (18,000 sec; data for five groups repre-
senting 15 learners). Our technique extracted data for 7,787 sec as
candidates of probing behavior, and among these data, 6,786 sec
correctly matched the ground-truth data. Thus, we confirmed that
the technology could accurately recognize the time when probing
behavior occurred (precision = 87.1%) by automatically analyzing
the LPS data of the learners [15].

Knowledge exchange and intellectual investigation are the states
of group collaboration based on the interaction between learners.
With our sensing technique, we were able to estimate such group
collaboration by individually sensing each person who participated
in the collaboration.

4.2 3D Determination of Target of Interests
By sensing stable stay conditions, an accurate real-time estimation
can be made of how probing behavior occurs in a learning field.
Moreover, by tracing the location of a learner with a GPS receiver,

walking pace

Tv [m/sec]

horizontal body 

orientation

T? [deg/sec]
duration

Tt [sec].....................

3D posture during the stable stay

looking 
straight

head height 1

looking
 up

crouching 
down

head height 2

head 
posture

body
posture

stable stay

Figure 7: Estimating 3D posture during the state of stable stay.

both the 2D locations of interest and the time spent engaged in
probing behavior can be determined. Because this is an advanced
technology, it is still difficult to estimate what the learner actually
learns in the world. By identifying the targets on which probing be-
havior is focused, we hope to clarify the associated content and the
knowledge acquisition process. Stable stay is defined in a horizon-
tal 2D plane and can be used for robust identification of probing
behavior. As shown in Figure 6, the postures of learners reflect
their interests at that time. In this research, we therefore extended
the technique for recognizing stable stay behavior to also identify
the posture involved (Figure 7), thus allowing the 3D position of
the topic of interest to be determined.

An eye-mark recorder is conventionally used to track the gaze di-
rection of a person. However, because current eye-mark recorders
are large and heavy, they restrict the movement of a learner in the
world. Furthermore, when a learner moves, his/her location and
head direction constantly change without constraint. This makes it
difficult to use data from an eye-mark recorder for automatic de-
termination of what is being observed. Here, we trace the head
direction instead of eye movement, because it is known that head
direction and gaze direction are closely related, and head direction
can be substituted for gaze direction [20]. For example, as shown in
Figure 6 and Figure 7, to observe objects at ground level, learners
need to crouch or bend their head down. A learner who is crouching
down has a different head height from one who is standing upright
(Figure 7). Thus, this paper proposes an idea to classify a learner’s
posture (e.g., looking straight ahead, looking up, looking down, or
crouching down) based on head height, head tilt, and body tilt. In
this method, we provide each learner with wearable-type hybrid
motion sensors (shown in Figure 4) for the head and body, in addi-
tion to an LPS for the lower back and a GPS receiver for the head.
The hybrid motion sensor (22 g, 37 x 46 x 12 mm) has a 3-axis ac-
celerometer (50 Hz), a 3-axis gyroscope (50 Hz), and a barometer
(25 Hz) built in. The accelerometers obtain 3D tilt information, and
the barometer obtains height information. The gyroscopes obtain
3D information about the rotation of a learner’s body and head.

Preliminary evaluation of sensor data was done to test our assump-
tion for designing a classifier for recognizing body posture, and
the evaluation found the typical characteristics of sensor data as-
sociated with each target posture [16]. For a detailed analysis, in
this paper, we further investigated the data obtained in experiments
with 33 adult learners at Kamigamo Experimental Forest in 2009

6



and 2010. When learners stood upright and were looking straight
ahead, the output from the vertical axes of the accelerometers at-
tached on the body and the head almost equaled the gravitational
acceleration (1000 mG). In contrast, when the body and head of
a learner were tilted, the accelerometers also tilted and the gravita-
tional acceleration was properly split into two or three components.
The experiments also showed that the sensor data exhibited differ-
ent characteristics for each of the target behaviors (e.g., looking up,
standing upright, and crouching down). We also examined actual
behavior of the learners at the experiments by manually checking
video records. Then, we found that the information of acceleration,
angular velocity, and height is useful for determining the posture of
a learner’s head and body. Moreover, although noise reduction is a
basic problem of signal processing, these experiments showed that
sensor data noise caused by the learner’s movement is considerably
reduced during the state of stable stay. We found that this is a merit
for robust pattern classification of learner behavior. For implement-
ing a posture identification technique, the integration of multimodal
sensor data is carried out by a support vector machine (SVM). Our
signal processing is implemented to be done in real time to realize
real-time learning support according to learner situations.

5. FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT BY SPATIO-
TEMPORAL BEHAVIOR INFORMATION

Our method consists of three key elements formed by components
1, 2, and 3: knowledge, behavior, and the environment. First, our
research on component 1 showed that knowledge and topics that
can be learned in a real-world learning field are three-dimensionally
dependent, although a wide variety of intellectual activities occur
there. We showed that each region in the horizontal plane offers
only a small number of topics, and each layer in the vertical direc-
tion of an ecosystem promotes the acquisition of different knowl-
edge. Second, component 2 was developed by focusing on the
3D role of a learner’s body as an interactive medium for obtain-
ing real-world information from his/her surroundings. We found
the time series of probing behavior can be precisely estimated by
determining a characteristic stay behavior (i.e., stable stay) that fre-
quently occurs during the state of probing behavior. Importantly,
the ground-truth data from audio-visual records of learning activ-
ities showed that a learner in a group rarely did stable stay when
learner collaboration in his/her group did not actively function. It
follows from this that the occurrence estimation of stable stay pro-
vides us not only with an index to evaluate the activity of each
individual learner at a given time, but also with an index to evalu-
ate the activities made by the learner’s group at that time. We also
confirmed the possibility that the 3D position of a learner’s focus
can be identified by sensing and determining a learner’s 3D posture
that is involved in the state of stable stay.

However, we should point out that it is hard to estimate real-world
contexts in which learners are involved if we do not systematically
integrate world characteristics (e.g., spatial distribution of real-world
information) and human behavior. Behavior-based context estima-
tion alone is not enough for our purpose, even if we determine
the occurrence of probing behavior and 3D spatial placement of
the learners’ focus. Diversity and the effects of discovery learning
emerge in the process of learners’ bottom-up knowledge processing
based on their own interests. But without the data of spatial infor-
mation distribution in a field, it is hard to estimate the information
that a learner actually accesses or does not access. Similarly, it is
not possible to consider the spatial contexts around a learner, such
as the difficulty of knowledge acquisition at his/her current loca-
tion.

23

34

 6

14

22

33

47

 5

13

32

46

59

 4

12

31

45

58

 3

11

21

44

57

69

 2

10

20

43

56

68

 1

 9

19

30

42

55

67

 8

18

29

41

54

66

76 

 7 

17

28

40

53

65

75

16

27

39

52

64

74

15

26

38

51

63

73

25

37

50

62

72

80

24

36

49

61

71

79

35

48

60

70

77

Area for learning
(each grid: 10x10 m)

Location with information that is hard to understand

7877

7672

50 51 5248

42 44 45

12

20

26 29

Figure 8: Difficulty of knowledge acquisition at each location.

5.1 Extracting Spatial Characteristics of a Field
As component 3, we integrate the heterogeneous elements of knowl-
edge, behavior, and the environment, and summarize the spatiotem-
poral occurrence of learning activities in a field for systematically
understanding real-world learning situations.

5.1.1 3D Spatial Characteristics of a Learning Field
By analyzing 15 learners’ data in our experimental field in 2010, we
found that a different quality of information exists at each location
in a field [15]. For example, we found the locations where learners
casually passed through without staying (26 regions of 80 regions;
32.5%). We also found the locations where probing behavior and
interest level occurred for a long period of time, but knowledge-
level learning hardly occurred. In Figure 8, 15 regions (18.8%)
are such locations, where learners had acute interests, actively tried
to obtain information through observation or investigation, but did
not successfully understand the nature of the information. 2D clas-
sification of a field from the time amount of learning activities at
each location showed that the value of each location in a field is not
equal. This classification extracted important locations that have
discovery knowledge that is hard to understand, even if learners en-
thusiastically make an observation, an investigation, and a discus-
sion. This is a basic result showing that our method can illustrate
learning situations involving a learner in the world.

Furthermore, as an advantage of our method, the above classifica-
tion technique can be three-dimensionally extended to better ex-
plain real-world spatial characteristics. For example, information
distribution inherent in each 3D region in a learning field can be
extracted by using our sensing technologies for 3D measurement
of learner behavior and 3D determination of a learner’s focus in
the world. Such 3D spatial characteristics of a field can be used
as prior knowledge for determining the situation where learners fo-
cusing on each 3D location are expected to be involved. In other
words, this extended technique makes it possible to express the 3D
spatial contexts around a learner, for example, from the difficulty of
knowledge acquisition at the 3D location of his/her current interest.

5.1.2 Probabilistic Spatial Modeling Based on Learn-
ing Processes

The result of learning is achieved through the process of a chain
of activities from the past to the present. In the case that learners
failed in knowledge acquisition at a location, it is expected that the
process of their activities had some problems. The analysis shown
in the previous subsection was a method to show the “result” of
learning at each location (e.g., whether learners understood infor-
mation at each location), and is useful to predict the result in how

7



learning at each location tends to end.

As an advantage of our method, we can identify the problematic
learning processes that posed obstacles to knowledge development
and then structure a field including the “process” of learning at each
location. We can make a location-based model explaining how in-
dividual learning activities (i.e., points in time) made a time-series
sequential chain (i.e., lines, or a network) and promoted intellectual
achievements. For example, the multimodal techniques discussed
in this paper can be used to track the sequence and co-occurrence of
behavior and each level of learning at each location, to find patterns
of learning activities inherent at each location, and to extract struc-
tural problems in the chain or transition of learning activities. This
makes it possible to calculate the probabilistic structure of the oc-
currence and transition of learning situations in a field, including,
for example, the probability of acquiring and developing knowl-
edge at each location based on the probability that preparatory-level
learning at a location failed to promote interest-level learning or
knowledge-level learning.

5.2 Process of Assessing Real-world Learning
Discovery learning in a bottom-up style should be autonomously
driven by learners, not by educators. However, such bottom-up
learning does not necessarily mean learning without the aid of ed-
ucational support. When bottom-up learning is deadlocked, small
hints (not answers) are helpful for encouraging learners to do prospec-
tive activities for breaking the deadlock. Here, how and when
should learning support be given to learners in the world? Needless
to say, it is not our position to one-sidedly provide definite and cor-
rect answers with learners in a top-down style because this will not
promote the learners’ autonomy. In our position, the necessity of
learning support needs to be determined by considering what activ-
ities learners are autonomously doing or not doing. Similarly, the
delivery of learning support needs to be driven by considering the
state of bottom-up knowledge acquisition in the world.

In conventional studies, few approaches have been proposed about
how to systematically understand the intellectual state of learners
interacting with and in the world. As component 3 in Figure 4
shows, we can integrate the recognition results of 3D behavior in a
region in a field with the 3D spatial characteristics of the region and
then form an understanding of learning situations at a given time at
a high level of abstraction. Real-time data processing (e.g., signal
processing and information retrieval) is mainly designed to run on a
Java software environment as a client service of a mobile computer
with ubiquitous sensors, so that a learner in the world can acquire
the services of adaptive learning support. At the first system boot, a
local client is designed to access the server database that stores the
spatial characteristics of the field (spatial index database), to make
a local copy of the database, and to use the local copy for efficient
information retrieval.

Our method gives us knowledge on specific objects and informa-
tion that are potentially effective in a learning field. Although such
knowledge can be used in top-down education, our scaffolding of
learning, based on learners’ autonomy, is intended to avoid unnec-
essary intervention in learners’ activities. Learners’ autonomous
activities observed with our method are used as service triggers
for driving context-aware learning support to encourage bottom-up
knowledge acquisition in the world.

Let us assume that learners stay at a location with discovery knowl-
edge (Figure 2) and examine the aerial roots of a plant on the

ground while crouching down. The following is an example of
estimating such a situation by using the 3D spatial contexts of the
world.

(1) Real-world behavior of a learner is measured and estimated with
wearable sensors. GPS information shows the 2D stay location of
a learner at a given time. The 3D location of the target of his/her
interest or consciousness is determined by sensing his/her 3D pos-
ture during the state of stable stay. In this example, the posture of
crouching down is estimated and shows that the learner notices the
lower layer of the ecosystem and that he/she is examining learning
objects inherent at this layer as the current learning topic.

(2) Queries are sent to the spatial index database (local database)
by using these recognition results as reference keys. A learner’s
2D location at a given time limits the range of potential learning
contents that can be examined at his/her location. In this example,
the database answers several possible topics, including the topic
of aerial roots of a plant on the ground. The 3D location of the
learner’s focus determines the topic that can be studied by focusing
on each layer. Learners can examine several topics at the location,
but, in this case, the estimation result shows the situation that the
learner in the world is examining aerial roots on the ground as the
main topic. At the same time, the characteristics of each topic can
be known by referring to the spatial index database, and we can
estimate the features (e.g., difficulty of knowledge acquisition) of
the learning topic that the learner is examining.

Various context information estimated by our method acts as the
core for realizing context-aware learning support adapted to the in-
terest and viewpoint of each learner. For example, if a learner ca-
sually passed through an important location with abundant discov-
ery knowledge without doing a suitable amount of stable stay, the
learner was probably unaware of the interest, values, and wonder
of the location. Or, if a learner did stable stay but did not carefully
watch the layer where information was embedded, he/she failed to
find the seeds of discovery knowledge as a topic of observation
or discussion. In these cases, our estimation method regards the
learner’s observation, investigation, and discussion as insufficient.
Estimation with our method identifies 3D locations where knowl-
edge has not yet been achieved and determines important learning
objects whose existence is overlooked or whose value is not dis-
covered. Then, learners are encouraged to study at the locations
that are interesting but difficult for achieving knowledge, and are
encouraged to be aware of potential information that should be ex-
amined. As another example, by extracting the locations where a
small number of learners did very active learning, we can find the
locations that only sensitive and keen learners can notice. Learn-
ers are encouraged to visit such important locations and to acquire
the discovery knowledge there. Furthermore, by considering prob-
lematic situations that tend to occur at each location, appropriate
support can be provided to learners. These supports do not aim at
top-down educational support for giving learners concrete answers.
Instead, these supports aim at bottom-up learning support for di-
recting learners’ attention to potential information in the world and
for drawing out prospective activities to approach an answer and
autonomously make discovery in the world. The timing and the
frequency of these supports can be tuned according to the strategy
of bottom-up learning.

This research considered integrating components 1, 2, and 3 as a
unified and systematical assessment method for real-time CSCL
applications. The evaluation results of each component show the

8



basic performance of our technologies for context-aware and adap-
tive real-time support for real-world learning, such as the deter-
mination of spatial contexts that learners at each location are ex-
pected to be involved in. An important contribution of this pa-
per is our proposed new method for real-time formative assessment
of various high-level situations of intellectual collaboration chang-
ing from moment to moment in the world. Our method integrates
both the distribution structure of real-world information and the hu-
man real-world interaction. An advantage of our method is that we
showed a method to generate many indexes to systematically un-
derstand real-world learning situations. For example, “the duration
of stable stay about a certain target” can be used as an index of
“the intensity of a learner’s interest in the target”, and an index of
“the intensity of collaboration in his/her group”. “The tendency of
the time series and the spatial change of topics in which a learner
is interested and learns in the world” is an index to understand the
viewpoints from which the learner grasps and examines real-world
problems. Our method realizes a new way to objectively grasp the
direction of his/her interest, thinking, and learning activities. Our
method focuses on each of the diverse learning activities and serves
to strengthen and enlarge the interest of each learner. This draws
out new viewpoints and learning activities from each learner and
promotes his/her discovery activities. Consequently, it is possible
to promote active collaboration between learners in a group activ-
ity, and to help the bottom-up emergence of new knowledge from
real-world collaboration. Our method is a type of methodology that
is not proposed by conventional studies and is valuable for the inno-
vation of collaboration support technologies in real-world settings.

5.3 Extensibility of the Method
An effective learning environment can be formatively designed by
making a field practice, getting feedback from the practice, and re-
fining the design principle [4]. Our method is designed so that it can
be flexibly extended. For example, when system designers want to
use sensors installed in the environment, sensing information from
such environmental sensors can be incorporated into the component
2 functions of our method. When system designers find behaviors
that are complementarily useful for identifying learning situations,
they can add new behavior-estimation engines to component 2 and
improve the granularity and coverage of learners’ context that the
method deals with. For example, recent social science has shown
that a body condition called “body torque” (i.e., the condition that
only a person’s upper body twists independently of his/her lower
body) is displayed when a person is inactively and subordinately
involved in an activity [18]. By adopting such research results from
behavior science, it is possible to estimate that “a learner who si-
multaneously displays both stable stay and body torque at a given
time” is in the state of probing behavior, but his/her interaction
with the world is not so active. As illustrated by this example,
context-aware CSCL services with our method are improved by
better scientific understanding of human behavior. Similarly, com-
ponent 1 can be replaced according to developments of knowledge
science, and component 3 can be replaced by an information inte-
gration method such as probabilistic reasoning algorithms. This pa-
per looked at the future extension of context estimation techniques
adapted to various demands and possible advances in research and
proposed a basic method to systematically and flexibly grasp situa-
tions in real-world learning.

5.4 Future Work
Our research made it possible to automatically estimate not only the
occurrence of important learning but also the 3D target of interest
by examining the sensor data of learners’ physical behavior. Our

future work includes simplifying the labor of other processes of the
analysis. If we enable a learner in the world to make a digital memo
(automatically time-stamped) with a portable device, then we can
record the time-series process of acquiring knowledge seeds in the
world. This is technically easy and would reduce the work of gen-
erating the time-series occurrence data of learning activities. More-
over, conventional research suggests that it is possible to automat-
ically estimate the detailed structure of a semantic network if the
network is written with simple sentences and obviously describes
the co-reference information [7]. These techniques are expected to
simplify and automate the analysis of the activity map.

Our method was applied to autonomous bottom-up learning in the
world without forcing real-world learners to follow predefined sce-
narios or viewpoints to explore a field. In general, each individual
differently grasps and interprets the world according to his/her own
schema. An important point is that our spatial indexing technique
integrated the different results of such spatial recognition. In the
future, we will conduct larger-scale experiments with more partici-
pants to further investigate the applicability of our method. Our fu-
ture work includes verifying learning effects achieved by our new
approach to real-world learning. It is valuable to take more con-
sideration of the relationship between real-world interpretation and
people’s subjective views, and to apply our method to people from
different cultures and different domains (e.g., learning in museums
and learning in the sea). Our method mainly focused on human-
world interaction for interactively acquiring knowledge from the
world. Future work should consider integrating the social elements
of human-human interaction that include, for example, the dynamic
development of collaboration policies in group learning.

Our method is designed for a real-world field in which the occur-
rence of behavior can be structured according to location, and we
should consider how our method is applicable to other fields. Since
our method focused on behavior externalized outside of a learner,
it is not designed for tracing internally hidden mental states such as
silent reflection inside a learner. The method has these limitations,
but, as potential application fields of our method, we can find many
real-world fields in which the occurrence of behavior is restricted
by location, and situations at such fields are expected to be deter-
mined from the information of behavior and location. For example,
areas in an office have functions associated with a certain physical
behavior (e.g., corridors for walking, places for doing desk work,
and places for taking a break by sitting in a chair) [5]. Similarly, at
a hospital, different rooms are assigned for doing certain behaviors
(e.g., rooms for doctor consultations, rooms for performing medi-
cal operations, and rooms for staff meetings). Automatic tracing of
business procedures at such real-world fields is a potential advan-
tage for labor management and optimization of human resources.
Our proposed basic ideas and analysis techniques will be applica-
ble to the investigations of the tendency of the spatial occurrence
of collaboration in other real-world fields. Therefore, it is an im-
portant theme of the future to accumulate practical knowledge in
various real-world fields by using our method.

6. CONCLUSIONS
Our challenge is designing and creating a new learner-centered en-
vironment for promoting discovery learning through autonomous
bottom-up knowledge acquisition in the world. Automatic assess-
ment of a learning activity is the base for effective learning support,
but, unlike classroom learning, the methodology to formatively as-
sess autonomous bottom-up learning in the world has not yet been
well investigated. The main difficulty in the assessment is the lack

9



of a methodology to measure, grasp, and summarize the learning
experience that a learner autonomously obtains in the world. For
considering new analytics for real-world learning, we confronted
this difficulty by capturing and understanding human learning ex-
periences in the world with ubiquitous computing technologies.

We discussed the distinctive characteristics of real-world learning
and considered the requirements for assessing real-world learning
situations. Our originality is based on the viewpoint that real-world
learners use their bodies to interact with their surroundings and
then to obtain knowledge about the world. We suggested obser-
vation techniques of internal and external situations of a real-world
learner and proposed a context estimation method for real-world
learning by systematically integrating the heterogeneous elements
of knowledge, behavior, and environment.

As a result of observing the internal situation (e.g., interest and
knowledge) of a learner, we showed that each 3D region in an
ecosystem promotes the acquisition of different knowledge. As
a result of sensing the external situation of a learner, we showed
that information access behavior and the 3D location of interest
can be identified by sensing the learners’ body motion and pos-
ture. As a result of integrating the internal and external situation of
a learner, we showed that our technique can illustrate real-world
spatial contexts of how each 3D region of the field encourages
the learners’ knowledge acquisition (e.g., from the probability of
knowledge acquisition and problematic situations). Our method
enabled the estimation of 3D locations where discovery knowledge
has not yet been achieved and the identification of potential infor-
mation that should be examined. As another advantage, we showed
a method to generate many indexes to systematically understand
real-world learning situations, including, for example, the intensity
of a learner’s interest in a certain target, the intensity of collabo-
ration in his/her group, and the viewpoints from which the learner
grasps and examines real-world problems.

The assessment method of high-level learners’ contexts in real-
world learning is not proposed by conventional studies, but our sys-
tematic integration method of the spatiotemporal occurrence infor-
mation of real-world behavior is a foundation for learner-centered
support adapted to the interest and viewpoint of each of the diverse
learners in the world. Such support draws out new interests, view-
points, and activities from each of the participants in group learning
and promotes the emergence of new knowledge from real-world
collaboration. Our new analytics with ubiquitous computing tech-
niques is expected to be helpful in formatively designing a better
learning environment for real-world learning.

7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank the staff at Kamigamo Experimental Forest, Ky-
oto University for supporting our experiments. This research was
funded by MEXT/JSPS KAKENHI (22700121, 25330234).

8. REFERENCES
[1] B. S. Bloom. Human Characteristics and School Learning.

McGraw-Hill, New York, 1976.
[2] J. S. Brown, A. Collins, and P. Duguid. Situated cognition

and the culture of learning. Educational Researcher,
18(1):32–42, January–February 1989.

[3] H.-C. Chu, G.-J. Hwang, C.-C. Tsai, and J. C. R. Tseng. A
two-tier test approach to developing location-aware mobile
learning systems for natural science courses. Computers &
Education, 55(4):1618–1627, December 2010.

[4] A. Collins, D. Joseph, and K. Bielaczyc. Design research:
theoretical and methodological issues. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 13(1): 15-42, January 2004.

[5] D. Demirdjian, K. Tollmar, K. Koile, N. Checka, and
T. Darrell. Activity maps for location-aware computing. In
Proc. WACV2002, pages 70–75. IEEE, December 2002.

[6] S. D’Mello and A. Graesser. Automatic detection of learner’s
affect from gross body language. Applied Artificial
Intelligence, 23(2):123–150, February 2009.

[7] K. Hasida. Semantic platform based on ontologies and
constraints (written in Japanese). Japanese Society for
Artificial Intelligence, 21(6):712–717, November 2006.

[8] A. Kapoor, W. Burleson, and R. W. Picard. Automatic
prediction of frustration. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 65(8):724–736, August 2007.

[9] A. Kobayashi, S. Muramatsu, D. Kamisaka, T. Watanabe,
A. Minamikawa, T. Iwamoto, and H. Yokoyama. Shaka: User
movement estimation considering reliability, power saving,
and latency using mobile phone. IEICE Transactions on
Information and Systems, E94-D(6):1153–1163, June 2011.

[10] J. Lave and E. Wenger. Situated Learning: Legitimate
Peripheral Participation. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 1991.

[11] J. Lester, T. Choudhury, and G. Borriello. A practical
approach to recognizing physical activities.
PERVASIVE2006, LNCS3968:1–16, May 2006.

[12] T. Mizukoshi and T. Kihara. Creation of New Environmental
Education (in Japanese). Minerva Shobo, Kyoto, 1995.

[13] J. D. Novak and D. B. Gowin. Learning How to Learn.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1984.

[14] M. Okada and M. Tada. Method to analyze spatial
characteristics of a real-world learning field. In Proc.
ED-MEDIA2011, AACE, pages 1413–1422, June 2011.

[15] M. Okada and M. Tada. Multimodal analysis of spatial
characteristics of a real-world learning field. In Proc.
WMUTE2012, IEEE, pages 25–32, March 2012.

[16] M. Okada and M. Tada. Sensing learner access to the
knowledge spatially embedded in the world. In Proc.
MOBILITY 2012, pages 27–33, October 2012.

[17] T. Okamoto, N. Nagata, and F. Anma. The knowledge
circulated-organisational management for accomplishing
e-learning. Knowledge Management & E-Learning,
1(1):6–17, March 2009.

[18] E. A. Schegloff. Body torque. Social Research,
65(3):535–596, September 1998.

[19] B. F. Skinner. The Technology of Teaching. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1968.

[20] M. Tada, H. Noma, A. Utsumi, M. Okada, and K. Renge.
Automatic evaluation system of driving skill using wearable
sensors for personalized safe driving lecture. In Proc. Mobile
Learning 2012, pages 173–180, March 2012.

[21] O. Türkyilmaz, F. Alagöz, G. Gür, and T. Tugcu.
Environment-aware location estimation in cellular networks.
EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing,
2008(139): 1–9, January 2008.

[22] J. Yin, Q. Yang, and J. J. Pan. Sensor-based abnormal
human-activity detection. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering, 20(8):1082–1090, August 2008.

10





