Learning Analytics: European Perspectives     Rebecca Ferguson1, Adam Cooper2, Hendrik Drachsler3, Gbor Kismihk4, Anne Boyer5,  Kairit Tammets6, Alejandra Martnez Mons7      1 IET   The Open University  Milton Keynes    MK7 6AA  UK   r.m.ferguson@open.ac.uk   2 IEC  University of Bolton   Deane Road  Bolton, BL3 5AB   UK  a.r.cooper@bolton.ac.uk   3 Welten Institute   OUNL    Valkenburgerweg   177 6419 AT Heerlen   The Netherlands  Hendrik.Drachsler@ou.nl   4 Amsterdam Business  School   University of Amsterdam  1018 TV Amsterdam   The Netherlands  G.Kismihok@uva.nl     5 LORIA   Universit de Lorraine  Campus scientifique, BP 239  54506 Vandoeuvre-ls-Nancy   France  anne.boyer@univ-lorraine.fr   6 Institute of Informatics   Tallinn University   Narva mnt 25   10120 Tallinn   Estonia   kairit@tlu.ee   7 GSIC-EMIC Group  Universidad de Valladolid    Paseo de Beln, 15  47011 Valladolid   Spain  amartine@infor.uva.es       ABSTRACT  Since the emergence of learning analytics in North America,  researchers and practitioners have worked to develop an  international community. The organization of events such as  SoLAR Flares and LASI Locals, as well as the move of LAK in  2013 from North America to Europe, has supported this aim.  There are now thriving learning analytics groups in North  American, Europe and Australia, with smaller pockets of activity  emerging on other continents. Nevertheless, much of the work  carried out outside these forums, or published in languages other  than English, is still inaccessible to most people in the  community. This panel, organized by Europes Learning  Analytics Community Exchange (LACE) project, brings together  researchers from five European countries to examine the field  from European perspectives. In doing so, it will identify the  benefits and challenges associated with sharing and developing  practice across national boundaries.   Categories and Subject Descriptors  K.3.0 [Computers and Education]: General   General Terms  Education, Learning   Keywords  Europe; international; LACE project; learning; learning analytics.   1. INTRODUCTION  Since its formation in 2011, the Society for Learning Analytics  Research (SoLAR) has, as its website states, worked to advance  the field of learning analytics globally. In order to achieve this  objective, it has supported SoLAR Flare events that have brought  practitioners together on three continents. It has also supported a  network of LASI Local events that have been run in parallel with  the main Learning Analytics Summer Institutes in the USA. In  2013, venues for LASI Local events included Hong Kong, South  Africa and an online LASI-Latin-America event, as well as six  events in different parts of Europe.   The Learning Analytics and Knowledge (LAK) conferences have  also aimed to attract international engagement, and the organisers  have actively monitored how successfully this has been achieved.  At the 2013 conference, held in Leuven, Belgium, submissions  were received with author affiliations from 31 countries world- wide, and accepted papers include affiliations from Australia,  Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador,  France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Italy, Malta, the  Netherlands, Norway, Spain, South Africa, Switzerland, the  United Kingdom, and the United States of America [5].   However, this positive representation of international engagement  may obscure the fact that the majority of learning analytics  research and practice visible to an international audience is  written in English. Reports and tools that are designed for the  benefit of regional and national audiences are rarely shared more  widely unless they are originally written for English speakers. A  review of the learning analytics literature carried out in 2012,  focused on papers cited at the LAK conference and noted that,  These papers were all written in English, and their authors had  access to sufficient money to attend conferences. This study  therefore underrepresents the learning analytics work carried out  by non-English speakers and those from poorer countries [3].   This focus on work produced in English-speaking countries is a  problem because, as Suthers and Verbert noted when writing  about learning analytics and the LAK13 conference, Learning   Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third- party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses,  contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the authors.   LAK '15, Mar 16-20, 2015, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA   ACM 978-1-4503-3417-4/15/03.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723637      69    analytics is multidisciplinary, drawing on theories and methods  from diverse research traditions Our community includes  educators, learning scientists, computer scientists, administrators,  and policy makers [] Many voices are brought together, leading  to the question of how such multivocality can be productive [5].  The range of voices within the community includes not only those  from different research backgrounds and from different areas of  practice, but also from different regions, nations and continents. If  we can explore a range of ways of sharing work across national  boundaries, we can benefit the entire international community.   2. LEARNING ANALYTICS COMMUNITY  EXCHANGE (LACE)   In 2013, a consortium that includes organizations from Belgium,  Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the UK initiated the  Learning Analytics Community Exchange (LACE). This is a 30- month community support action that is funded by the European  Commissions Framework Seven. The LACE project brings  together key European players in the field of learning analytics  and educational data mining (EDM), all of whom are committed  to building communities of practice and sharing emerging best  practice in order to maximize the practical benefits of learning  analytics across Europe. Some of these key players are members  of the project consortium; others are involved as associate  partners, thus expanding the reach of the network across Europe.   In the original description of the LACE project, which was  submitted to the European Commission in 2012, consortium  members identified three reasons for establishing an organization  that could work with schools, higher education establishments and  businesses across Europe in the field of learning analytics.    1. Knowledge of what makes for effective and desirable learning  analytics is not well developed, so research and practice need to  be shared across national boundaries in order to be able to develop  this knowledge effectively.   2. The history of the development of technology-enhanced  learning (TEL) in Europe, and globally, shows that the market  cannot sustain many nationally specific or niche products. Despite  regional and national variations, Europeans will benefit if they can  use common products or adopt common standards that allow  smaller scale or niche products to be viable and product  innovation to flourish.    3. Operational systems and research in the fields of learning  analytics and EDM, as well as learning science research, improve  as the quantity of data increases. Although combining data sets is  challenging, it makes sense to reduce the challenges to data  sharing by taking whatever common approaches are practicable.    Although the focus of LACE activity is on Europe, its work is  also intended to influence and benefit the global learning analytics  community. This panel will help to achieve this objective by:    Providing examples of how researchers and  practitioners from different backgrounds and with  different perspectives can work together effectively to  develop research and practice around learning analytics.    Increasing international access to learning analytics  work that has been developed at local or national scale  and that has not previously been reported in English    Demonstrating ways in which research expertise  developed within European networks and communities  both currently and over the past decade can be used to  strengthen learning analytics work on a global scale.    Discussing ways in which different sets of standards and  legal frameworks can be taken into account and brought  together effectively.    Sharing details of the LACE Evidence Hub, which  builds on similar work carried out in the field of open  educational resources and elsewhere [1; 2]    Initiating conversations and research plans that can be  developed in future to the benefit of both the European  and the global learning analytics community.   3. AREAS FOR PANEL DISCUSSION  The panel will present a range of European perspectives, based on  work carried out on both European and national projects.   3.1 The work of the LACE project  Rebecca Ferguson and other LACE consortium partners will  briefly outline work being carried out by the project that will be of  interest to those attending LAK15. This will include a short  introduction to the LACE Evidence Hub, a site that brings  together evidence about learning analytics and clarifies how this  relates to a series of key questions that have emerged in the field.  Contributions to the Evidence Hub from LAK15 participants will  be welcomed and will help to strengthen this international  resource.   3.2 Privacy issues and data standards  Hendrik Drachsler and Adam Cooper will then focus on two  related areas of the LACE projects work. Developing learning  analytics across national boundaries is a complex undertaking.  This is, in part, because different standards and legal frameworks  apply in each case.    In the case of data standards, the LACE project is currently  working on the development of common terminology to advance  interoperability, with a focus on data elements that are found in  current practice. The intention is to indicate and explain, from the  particular perspective of learning analytics, where common  models or standards could advance adoption, research, and  innovation. A key part of this investigation is to gather evidence  from attempts to use current data standards. The project is also  considering data-sharing platforms and will make  recommendations in respect of high level system architecture,  sustainability, and a range of cultural, legal and ethical issues.  Adam Cooper will outline progress to date, and will explore ways  in which this work can benefit the international community and  the relationship of this work to the open learning analytics  initiative [4].   Hendrick Drachsler will deal with issues of privacy and ethics. He  will consider ways in which the production, collection and  processing of information from various learning platforms and  online environments have led to ethical and privacy concerns  within Europe with regard to potential harm to individuals and to  society. Concerns of this type have already had impact on areas as  diverse as computer science, legal studies and surveillance  studies. Hendrik will outline work carried out jointly by SURF (a  collaborative organization for ICT in Dutch higher education and  research) and the LACE project in order to improve understanding  of the issues and research challenges related to the ethical and  privacy aspects of learning analytics. Part of this programme of  work has involved gathering examples of issues from across  Europe to develop solutions that can be applied internationally.   70    3.3 Working together across   national boundaries   The LACE project is just one of the many trans-European projects  to be funded by the European Commission. Alejandra Martnez  Mons will talk about some of the work that was carried out as  part of the European Kaleidoscope Network of Excellence and  that has implications for the development of learning analytics  internationally.   The Kaleidoscope network brought together TEL researchers  from diverse disciplines and cultures across Europe to work  collaboratively on interdisciplinary projects that drew upon their  unique perspectives and areas of expertise. Through this  collaboration and sharing of scientific outcomes, they helped to  move the field of technology-enhanced learning forward.    One series of projects that was linked to Kaleidoscope employed  data collected from learning and teaching interactions in order to  produce meaningful results usable by teachers and students. These  related projects aimed to conceptualise interaction analysis  processes and tools in ways that took into account evaluation,  monitoring and self-reflection. As collaborative learning is a  complex process, which is difficult to control and predict, a  primary focus of these projects was on supporting participants in  performing their tasks better, with the aim of enhancing their  overall collaborative learning experience.   This European work now forms a basis for international work on  collaborative learning and analytics.   3.4 Developing a centre for   learning analytics research   While some projects related to TEL and learning analytics are  funded at a European level, other initiatives emerge at a national  level. Gbor Kismihk will describe the development of the  Learning Analytics Task Force at the University of Amsterdam.  This initiative began in 2012 when a number of educators,  researchers, and members of the innovation workgroup of the ICT  services of the University of Amsterdam decided to join forces.   The Task Force works at university level, but also has strong ties  to the SURF Learning Analytics Special Interest Group within  The Netherlands, and facilitates collaboration on learning  analytics between universities. This supports economies of scale  when it comes to carrying out research and developing tools. The  Task Force also serves as a platform for communication, so that  different faculties do not find that they are replicating work that  need only be carried out once and then shared.    The Task Force also has an international aspect, aiming to become  a leading European centre of learning-analytics-driven research,  teaching, social responsibility and innovation.   3.5 Learning analytics initiatives from  Estonia and France   Across Europe, learning analytics projects are underway that offer  the potential for impact beyond national boundaries.   The Estonian learning analytics community only emerged  recently, and the number of researchers within it is still relatively  small. Kairit Tammets will talk about initiatives developed by this  community that deserve attention on a wider scale.   The community-based system eDidaktikum has been designed to  support Estonian teacher education and is used by five teacher  education institutions. The tool uses learning analytics to provide   instant feedback to learners and course designers and to conduct  retrospective analysis of users engagement with the system.    Dippler is a digital learning ecosystem intended for use in higher  education. It combines the strengths of institutional learning  management systems with those of blog-based personal learning  environments. Dippler connects assignments with learning  outcomes through the use of domain-taxonomy-based keywords,  enabling contextualised analysis of learning interactions.  Educational Cloud is funded by the Estonian Ministry of  Education and Science, and makes use of learning analytics at the  level of secondary education. The aim is to develop a digital  ecosystem and toolsets for managing and accessing digital  resources that are produced and hosted by various content  providers. The system aggregates and makes accessible meta-data  related to digital learning resources such as e-textbooks that are  located in different repositories. Publishers, teachers and students  can create collections of these resources and share their  collections with other users. The system will track interactions  with these collections and related resources and aggregated  interaction data will be collected in a learning record store.   The xAPI specification is used on all these Estonian projects, and  so an informed and critical view of xAPI is also a focus of the  Estonian learning analytics community.  Kairits summary of learning analytics work in Estonia will be  followed by Anne Boyer, who will draw a panorama of research  activities in the field of learning analytics in France.  Presentations by panel participants will be followed by  opportunities for questions and open discussion. The intention is  that these will provide starting points for discussions and research  collaborations that will continue throughout LAK15 and will be  developed in the future.   4. ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The LACE project is funded by the European Commission  Seventh Framework Programme, grant number 619424.   5. REFERENCES  [1] DE LIDDO, A. and BUCKINGHAM SHUM, S., 2013. The   Evidence Hub: harnessing the collective intelligence of  communities to build evidence-based knowledge. In  Proceedings of the Large Scale Ideation and Deliberation  Workshop, (29 June2 July) (Munich, Germany).   [2] DE LIDDO, A., BUCKINGHAM SHUM, S.,  MCANDREW, P. and FARROW, R., 2012. The Open  Education Evidence Hub: a collective intelligence tool for  evidence based policy. In Proceedings of the Cambridge  2012: Joint OER12 and OpenCourseWare Consortium  Global 2012 Conference, (1618 April ) (Cambridge, UK).   [3] FERGUSON, R., 2012. Learning analytics:  drivers,  developments and challenges. International Journal of  Technology Enhanced Learning  (IJTEL) 4, 5/6, 304-317.   [4] SIEMENS, G., GAEVI, D., HAYTHORNTHWAITE, C.,  DAWSON, S., BUCKINGHAM SHUM, S., FERGUSON,  R., DUVAL, E., VERBERT, K. and BAKER, R.S.J.D.,  2011. Open Learning Analytics: An Integrated and  Modularized Platform (Concept Paper). SOLAR.   [5] SUTHERS, D. and VERBERT, K., 2013. Learning Analytics  as a "Middle Space". In Third International Learning  Analytics & Knowledge Conference (LAK13), Leuven,  Belgium, 1-4.   71    ENSURING INTERACTION BETWEEN  PANEL PARTICIPANTS  Panel participants are based in a variety of countries across  Europe and are all either members of the LACE consortium, or  associated partners of the LACE project. This shared connection  brought them together before the project panel was proposed, and  it is this connection that will form a common thread that links the  different presentations within the panel.   PANEL PARTICIPANTS  Rebecca Ferguson  Rebecca is a lecturer based in the Institute of Educational  Technology at The Open University, and a work package leader in  the LACE project. She was Workshops Chair of the Learning  Analytics and Knowledge conference in 2012 (LAK 2012) and  co-chair of the 1st and 2nd International Workshops on  Discourse-Centred Analytics. She has co-chaired two UK SoLAR  Flares  national symposia on learning analytics organised under  the auspices of the international Society for Learning Analytics  Research (SoLAR). Rebecca has published extensively on  learning analytics and social learning analytics.   Adam Cooper   Adam is a leading member of the LACE project consortium. He is  co-director of CETIS, an organisation that works on educational  technology innovation across the UK post-compulsory education  sector. He has more than 13 years experience of working in  interoperability and standards organisations, nationally and  internationally, and is currently a member of the UK Government  Open Standards Board and education ministrys Information  Standards Board. He has prior experience in the commercial  sector and managed a college learning technology department in  the late 1990s   Hendrik Drachsler  Hendrik is an assistant professor at the Welten Institute in the  Technology-Enhanced Learning Innovation Group (TELI) at the  Open Universiteit Nederland. He is a leading member of the  LACE project as well as a work package leader on other European  research projects, both past and present. His research interests  include learning analytics, personalization technologies,  recommender systems, educational data, open science, mobile  devices, and their applications in the fields of technology- enhanced learning, science 2.0, and health 2.0. He is the leader of  the EATEL SIG, dataTEL, and of the Learning Analytics special  interest group of the Dutch umbrella organization SURF.    Gbor Kismihk  Gbor obtained a summa cum laude PhD in management sciences  from the Corvinus University of Budapest in 2012. As co-founder  of the Center of Job Knowledge Research, he supervises four PhD  students in the fields of HRM  data science and learning  analytics. He has managed a number of large-scale innovation  networks with a budget of 3.7M EUR and smaller scale  innovation projects with a budget of 500K EUR. He has also  written a series of successful research project proposals (FP7, FP7  MC ITN, EU LLP, TAMOP). He has published his research in  various peer-reviewed international journals and book chapters in  the fields of knowledge management and education (including the  British Educational Research Journal, the European Journal of  Education, the International Journal of Knowledge and Learning,  and the International Journal of Mobile and Blended Learning).  He is a core member of the Learning Analytics Special Interest  Group of the Dutch umbrella organization SURF.    Alejandra Martnez Mons  Alejandra is an associate professor at the University of Valladolid  with a long-standing research interest in collaborative learning  and social network analysis. This has led her to research networks  of engagement within Kaleidoscope, a European Network of  Excellence in which over 1,000 researchers and practitioners  from more than 90 institutes across Europe participated. Alejandra  is a member of the Spanish Network of Learning Analytics  (SNOLA), a Spanish special interest group.   Kairit Tammets  Kairit is a researcher at Estonias Institute of Informatics  Centre  for Educational Technology (CET)  at Tallinn University. She is  currently involved in two large-scale European projects that make  use of learning analytics: the European Multiple MOOC  Aggregator (EMMA) and Learning Layers, which is developing a  set of modular and flexible technological layers that scaffold  learning in networks of small and medium-sized enterprises.    Anne Boyer  Anne is a professor at the University of Lorraine, where she is a  team leader in the area of knowledge, information and web  intelligence. This includes research into social networks and  recommender systems. She is also an adviser on open educational  resources for Frances Ministre de lducation Nationale, de  lEnseignement Suprieur et de la Recherche (MENESR).     72      