Pipeline for Expediting Learning Analytics and  Student Support from Data in Social Learning  Yohan Jo, Gaurav Tomar, Oliver Ferschke, Carolyn Penstein Ros, Dragan Gaevic School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA  {yohanj, gtomar, ferschke, cprose}@cs.cmu.edu Schools of Education and Informatics, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK  dgasevic@acm.org  ABSTRACT An important research problem in learning analytics is to expedite the cycle of data leading to the analysis of student progress and the improvement of student support. For this goal in the context of social learning, we propose a pipeline that includes data infrastructure, learning analytics, and in- tervention, along with computational models for individual components. Next, we describe an example of applying this pipeline to real data in a case study, whose goal is to inves- tigate the positive eects that goal-setting students have on their peers, which suggests ways in which we might foster these social benefits through intervention.  Categories and Subject Descriptors K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]  General Terms Algorithms, Human Factors, Languages  Keywords Learning Analytics, Social Learning  1. INTRODUCTION More and more recent work in educational data mining  and learning analytics refers to a virtuous cycle of data leading to insight on what students need and then improve- ments in support for learning [3]. An important goal is tight- ening this cycle. In this paper, we propose a pipeline and its component models that can achieve this goal.  In this work we are specifically interested in social learn- ing. Social learning is based on a Vygotskian theoretical frame where learning practices begin within a social space and become internalized through social interaction. That interaction may involve observation or more intensive inter- action through cycles of feedback and help exchange.  We will present a three-part pipeline for expediting data analysis and student support in social learning. The pipeline  Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). LAK 16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883912  consists of the data infrastructure for a uniform interface with heterogeneous data from social interaction, a proba- bilistic model for analyzing learning pathways in social con- texts, and recommendation technology to evaluate and sup- port learning processes. We will then present a case study, in which we describe an example of applying our method to real data and summarize the findings from the case study.  2. MODELS AND CASE STUDY This section details the three models that power the sep-  arate components of the proposed pipeline as well as a case study where we applied the pipeline to data from social learning. The goal of the case study is to investigate the pos- itive eects that goal-setting students have on their peers, to measure the extent to which students are benefiting from these peer eects, and to oer a proof of concept of our recommendation system for increasing the extent to which these valuables connections between peers are made.  2.1 Course Context The data used in the case study was collected from the  ProSolo learning platform [2]. The course was oered on edX with the title Data, Analytics, and Learning (DALMOOC) from October to December 2014. In this dual layer MOOC, students had the option of choosing a more standard path through the course within the edX platform or to follow a more self-directed and social path in the external environ- ment ProSolo. The ProSolo layer encouraged students (1) to set their learning goals, (2) to write posts in the discussion forum on ProSolo or link their external posts on their own blogs and Twitter, and (3) to follow other students, so that they can easily access their followees activities and posts.  2.2 Data InfrastructureDiscourseDB Model: The significance of the data infrastructure proposed here, referred to as DiscourseDB1, lies in its ability to map diverse forms of discussion into a common representation, making it easy to apply analytic tools to dierent types of so- cial interactions across multiple platforms. Hence, analytic and intervention models can be applied with little change to any data once imported into DiscourseDB. The struc- ture of DiscourseDB is represented in a relational database as an entity-relation model of connected discourse contribu- tions organized in generic, nested discourse containers. For content information, DiscourseDB stores individual posts or messages into the contribution table, along with their past  1 http://discoursedb.github.io    revisions and relations between them, which can be arbitrar- ily typed (e.g., reply-of). User information is stored in the user table, along with information about social relationships between users and users contributions. Case study: We import the ProSolo data into DiscourseDB. Students individual goal notes, forum posts, blog posts, and tweets are mapped to contributions in DiscourseDB. Ev- ery contribution has the information about its source plat- form. The reply relations between posts are stored in dis- course relation. Students are mapped to the user table, and their follow relations are stored in the user relation table.  2.3 Learning AnalyticsSequence Model Model: We model students learning paths such that the building blocks of learning paths are induced from the data. This approach may find more representative units of student interests than predefined building blocks. For this purpose, we propose an extension of the previously published State Transition Topic Model (STTM) [1], in order to infer learn- ing paths from student behavior traces in a course. STTM is a combination of a Hidden Markov Model and Latent Dirich- let Allocation, where each state is represented as a topic distribution. Therefore, STTM can learn topics students are interested in within each state, and estimate a students state at each time point. STTM also learns the probabil- ities of state transitions, which reflect students progress. However, the original published STTM model is incapable of investigating how learning paths dier depending on the students social status, e.g., the existence or lack of connec- tion with certain peers. Therefore, we extended STTM to learn dierent transition probabilities for students depend- ing on their assigned status as well as the trend of students engagement in course topics and media in each state. Case study: We apply the model to the imported ProSolo data to analyze students learning paths conditioned on their social relationships. We are specifically interested in stu- dents who set goals using goal notes and in examining whether students who follow them have dierent learning paths from the others. The learning paths will show how such social connections make a dierence in the selection of course top- ics and social media the students choose. Our case study revealed that students following goal-setters show more in- terest in hands-on practice and subjects in the later part of the course in comparison to other students. Their transi- tions between states imply that they are more likely to link course materials learned across the course as well.  2.4 InterventionRecommendation System Model: Once we have identified patterns that distinguish successful and unsuccessful student paths, we may want to introduce interventions that we believe will increase the prevalence of successful paths. In the current work, that involves supporting students in adding connections to posi- tive role models in their network. In many learning environ- ments, discussions are the main means of social interaction among students. Our specific work proceeded by first assess- ing the extent to which students benefited from specific so- cial connections based on analysis of goal-setting behavior, and then by proposing a social recommendation approach that would enable students to find opportunities to add such connections. For this purpose, we first investigated sensitiv- ity on the part of students to identify eective role models to connect to naturally. The investigation was conducted  through link prediction by a social recommendation system that extends the matrix factorization model developed by Yang et al.[4]. The link prediction involved predicting con- nections students make through post-reply actions on dis- cussion threads. Incorporation of the goal-setting behavior of students in the model did not help this prediction task. That suggests that the students do not demonstrate a sen- sitivity to peer students goal-setting behavior while making connections. In order to help students connect to positive role models in their network, we extended the matrix factor- ization model, which already recommends connections as per preferences made by the students in the past, by introduc- ing a constraint which makes connections with positive role models (students having good goal-setting behavior) manda- tory. The model first generates recommendations which are relevant for students and then filters out some based on the constraint imposed. Case study: Our analytics have identified a positive ef- fect associated with social connection with goal-setting stu- dents. Thus, we are looking forward to opportunities to introduce interventions that would introduce more of these connections into the experiences of students. For example, we might provide students with opportunities to interact more frequently with goal-setters through discussion in the forums and through other social aordances by means of so- cial recommendation. Our model has been demonstrated to recommend learning partners that are not only relevant to a students preferences but are also qualified role models.  3. CONCLUSION We proposed a pipeline for expediting the process of mov-  ing from learning analytics to student support by using com- putational modelling approaches at every step in the pipeline. The concrete example of applying the pipeline to a case study and the result of the case study show the potential of the pipeline for various studies about social learning. We believe that social learning can benefit from technologies, such as discussion recommendation, conversational agents, and collaboration tools in MOOCs2.  4. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This research was supported by the National Science Foun-  dation under grants ACI-1443068 and IIS-1320064, and by the Naval Research Laboratory and Google.  5. REFERENCES [1] Y. Jo and C. P. Rose. Time Series Analysis of Nursing  Notes for Mortality Prediction via a State Transition Topic Model. In CIKM 15, 2015.  [2] C. P. Rose, O. Ferschke, G. Tomar, D. Yang, I. Howley, V. Aleven, G. Siemens, M. Crosslin, D. Gasevic, and R. Baker. Challenges and Opportu- nities of Dual-Layer MOOCs: Reflections from an edX Deployment Study. In CSCL 15, pages 848851, 2015.  [3] C. Thille. Education Technology as a Transformational Innovation. White House Summit on Community Colleges: Conference Papers, pages 7378, 2010.  [4] D. Yang, D. Adamson, and C. P. Rose. Question recommendation with constraints for massive open online courses. In RecSys 14, pages 4956, 2014.  2 http://dance.cs.cmu.edu/resources/    