Learning Analytics for Workplace and   Professional Learning   Tobias Ley  Tallinn University   Center for Educational Technology  Narva Mnt 29, 10120 Tallinn, Estonia   tley@tlu.ee     Stefanie Lindstaedt  Graz University of Technology   Knowledge Technologies Institute  Inffeldgasse 22, 8010 Graz, Austria   slind@tugraz.at    Ralf Klamma  RWTH Aachen University   Advanced Community Information Sytems  Ahornstr. 55, 52056 Aachen, Germany  klamma@dbis.rwth-aachen.de     Fridolin Wild   Oxford Brookes University  Oxford OX33 1HX  United Kingdom   fridolin.wild@gmail.com       ABSTRACT  Recognizing the need for addressing the rather fragmented  character of research in this field, we have held a workshop on  learning analytics for workplace and professional learning at the  Learning Analytics and Knowledge (LAK) Conference. The  workshop has taken a broad perspective, encompassing  approaches from a number of previous traditions, such as adaptive  learning, professional online communities, workplace learning  and performance analytics. Being co-located with the LAK  conference has provided an ideal venue for addressing common  challenges and for benefiting from the strong research on learning  analytics in other sectors that LAK has established. Learning  Analytics for Workplace and Professional Learning is now on the  research agenda of several ongoing EU projects, and therefore a  number of follow-up activities are planned for strengthening  integration in this emerging field.   CCS Concepts  Applied computingEducation   Keywords  Learning Analytics; Workplace Learning   1. INTRODUCTION  While learning analytics for all types of educational settings have  been striving in the past years [7], analytics for workplace  learning has been much less in the focus of the learning analytics  community. While Learning Analytics in educational settings very  often follow a particular pedagogical design, workplace learning  is much more driven by demands of work tasks or intrinsic  interests of the learner, by self-directed exploration and social      exchange that is tightly connected to processes and the places of  work [5]. Hence, learning interactions are to a large extent not  embedded into a pedagogical scenario. At the same time,  workplace learners can benefit from being exposed to their own  and others learning processes and outcomes as this potentially  allows for better awareness and tracing of learning, sharing  experiences, and scaling informal practices.   Recently, several different approaches to learning analytics in the  workplace have been suggested. Some of these have been coming  from the tradition of adaptive learning systems [4][6] or self- directed learning environments [9][10] for workplace learning or  lifelong learning [8], some from learning in professional  communities [1][3]. Recently, the topic of performance analytics  or analytics in smart industries has extended the focus to more  traditional work settings [11]. Yet, up to this point, the research  has been rather fragmented. New research challenges also abound  in workplace scenarios, such as the introduction of new  technologies (augmented interfaces, large scale collaboration  platforms), or the new challenges that derive from the need to  make informal learning processes better traceable and  recognizable.  We recognize that workplace learning scenarios can benefit from  existing research in education-based learning analytics approaches  and technologies. At the same time, we are convinced that the  community would benefit from a closer exchange around the  specificities of workplace learning, such as the unconstrained and  less plannable learning processes, the challenge to integrate  learning systems in work practices, or a methodological focus on  design-oriented research approaches with smaller samples in real  life settings.   At the same time, we think that researchers in the educational  domain can benefit from this workshop at LAK, as the clear  boundaries between formal and informal learning are increasingly  vanishing, and a focus on lifelong learning is increasingly being  established [8].   2. OBJECTIVES  The objective of this workshop is therefore to provide a forum for  researchers in the area of learning analytics who specifically  address learning at the workplace or in professional settings in  different forms and flavors. This includes on the job training, self- directed informal learning, community-based learning or   Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third- party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact  the Owner/Author.  Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04.  DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883860      continued professional education. We also particularly encourage  submissions that use learning analytics for enhancing the  integration of formal and informal learning process for lifelong  learning or workplace performance.  The LAK conference is a particularly well suited venue for this  workshop as several researchers in workplace learning have been  members of the LAK community, but a common focus point to  identify synergies and reflect about the state of research has up to  now been missing. Learning Analytics for Workplace and  Professional Learning is now on the research agenda of several  ongoing EU projects, and therefore the workshop provides a  timely mechanism for strengthening integration in this emerging  field.   3. TARGET GROUP  We expect researchers and professionals in the training or HR  sectors that are particularly focusing on workplace learning,  professional learning or performance support and are starting to  recognize the value of data-driven and evidence-based  interventions. We are also targeting researchers developing  learning analytics applications that have been tested in informal  work related settings, or those from the educational domain who  are starting to apply their approaches in more informal settings.  We take a broad view of workplace or professional learning which  could encompass all of the following    Informal self-directed forms of competence  development or performance support at the workplace    ad hoc and on the job training    learning in professional communities    collaborative learning and problem solving at the  workplace    continued professional education     connections of individual and organizational learning   4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  Updates on this workshop can be found at http://learning- layers.eu/laforwork/. The workshop is supported by EU-FP7  projects Learning Layers, TELL-ME and MIRROR, and H2020  projects WEKIT and CEITER.   5. REFERENCES  [1] De Laat, M., & Schreurs, B. (2013). Visualizing Informal   Professional Development Networks: Building a Case for  Learning Analytics in the Workplace. American Behavioral  Scientist, 57(10), 14211438.   [2] Drachsler, H., Verbert, K., Manouselis, N., Vuorikari, R.,  Wolpers, M., & Lindstaedt, S. (2012). Preface [Special issue   on dataTELData Supported Research in Technology- Enhanced Learning].   [3] R. Klamma. Community learning analytics: challenges and  opportunities. In Proceedings of Advances in Web-Based  Learning (ICWL), pages 284 - 293, Kenting, Taiwan, 2013.  Springer.   [4] B. Kump, C. Seifert, G. Beham, S. Lindstaedt, and T. Ley.  Seeing What the System Thinks You Know -Visualizing  Evidence in an Open Learner Model. In Proceedings of the  2nd International Conference on Learning Analytics and  Knowledge (LAK 12), pages 153-157, Vancouver, Canada,  2012. ACM.   [5] Ley, T., Cook, J., Dennerlein, S., Kravcik, M., Kunzmann,  C., Pata, K., Trattner, C. (2014). Scaling informal learning at  the workplace: A model and four designs from a large-scale  design-based research effort. British Journal of Educational  Technology, 45(6), 10361048. doi:10.1111/bjet.12197   [6] T. Ley and B. Kump. Which User Interactions Predict Levels  of Expertise in Work-integrated Learning In D. Hernandez- Leo, T. Ley, R. Klamma, and A. Harrer, editors, Proceedings  of the 8th European Conference on Technology-enhanced  Learning (EC-TEL 2013), pages 178-190, Paphos, Cyprus,  2013.   [7] N. Nistor, M. Derntl, and R. Klamma. Learning Analytics:  Trends and Issues of the Empirical Research of the Years  2011-2014. In Proceedings of the 10th European Conference  on Technology Enhanced Learning (EC-TEL 2015), pages  453 - 459, Toledo, Spain, 2015.   [8] Manh Pham, Raf Klamma; Data Warehousing for Lifelong  Learning Analytics, Bulletin of the Technical Committee on  Learning Technology, Volume 15, Issue 2, April 2013, 6-9.   [9] Dominik Renzel, Ralf Klamma, Milos Kravcik et al. (2015)  Tracing Self-Regulated Learning in Responsive Open  Learning Environments. ICWL 2015: 14th International  Conference, Guangzhou, China, November 5-8, 2015,  Proceedings. Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, pp 155164   [10] Dominik Renzel, Ralf Klamma: From Micro to Macro:  Analyzing Activity in the ROLE Sandbox, Proceedings of  the Third Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge,  LAK'13, Leuven, Belgium, April 8-12, 2013   [11] Wild, F., Scott, P., Lefrere, P., Karjalainen, J., Helin, K.,  Naeve, A., & Isaksson, E. (2014). Towards data exchange  formats for learning experiences in manufacturing  workplaces. In CEUR Workshop Proceedings (Vol. 1238, pp.  23-33).           