Multimodal Learning Analytics Data Challenges  Xavier Ochoa Escuela Superior Politcnica  del Litoral Va Perimetral Km. 30.5  Guayaquil, Ecuador xavier@cti.espol.edu.ec  Marcelo Worsley University of Southern  California 3470 Trousdale Parkway,  WPH-601A Los Angeles, CA, USA worsley@usc.edu  Nadir Weibel University of California, San  Diego La Jolla, CA, USA  weibel@ucsd.edu  Sharon Oviatt Incaa Designs  11140 Wing Point Drive, N.E. Bainbridge Island, WA, USA  sharon.oviatt@incaadesigns.org  ABSTRACT This is a proposal for organizing a Multimodal Learning An- alytics (MLA) data challenge as part of the workshop oer- ing of the Learning Analytics and Knowledge (LAK) confer- ence. It explains the motivation of the event, its objectives, target groups, expected format, organization, dissemination strategy and schedule.  CCS Concepts Applied computing ! Education;  Keywords Multimodal, Data Challenge, Multimodal datasets  1. MOTIVATION Learning is an innately multimodal activity. Students col-  laborate through face-to-face conversations, while using dig- ital and non-digital representations to support their ideas. Teachers use digital multimedia to explain a topic, while the students take notes on a multitude of digital and non- digital platforms. Students work together to build phys- ical projects, while annotating drawings and taking digi- tal photographs of their developments. Learning Analytics research, however, has concentrated mainly on computer- based learning contexts, where tools tend to automatically capture, in a fine-grained level of detail, the interactions with their users. The relative abundance of readily available data and the low technical barriers to process it, make computer- based learning systems the ideal place to conduct Learning Analytics research. On the contrary, in learning contexts where computers are not used, the actions of the actors of  Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). LAK 16 April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04. . . $15.00 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883913  the learning process are not automatically captured. With- out traces to be analyzed, computational models and tools used traditionally in Learning Analytics are not applicable. While this bias towards computer-based learning context has helped the initial stages of Learning Analytics, computer- based learning still represents a small subset of the learning contexts. Multimodal Learning Analytics[2] (MLA) seeks to expand the current scope of Learning Analytics, focusing on the analysis of learning processes that happen on the phys- ical or physical/virtual world and require the capture, pro- cessing and analysis of more natural signals such as speech, writing, sketching, facial expressions, hand gestures, object manipulation, tool use, artifact building, etc. This workshop is an opportunity to introduce members of the Learning An- alytic community to methodologies, techniques and tools to capture, process and analyze multimodal learning traces.  2. OBJECTIVES Facilitate access to multimodal datasets: One of the  main barriers to start research in MLA is access to high- quality, annotated multimodal recordings. By oering these datasets to any interested researcher, the MLA community seeks to expand the available human talent capable of con- ducting learning analytics studies with multimodal signals.  Sharing advanced approaches and techniques: The ability to contrast and compare approaches and techniques to analyze diverse multimodal signals is a result of working on common datasets and questions. Research teams are able to directly learn from the developments of other teams and the current state-of-the-art is easily determined.  Disseminate the state of MLA research: A goal for the workshop this year is to disseminate the current capabil- ities of MLA to analyze non-computer-based learning con- texts among the wide Learning Analytics community.  Identify new datasets: Including ones involving addi- tional modalities, languages, and learning activities.  3. DATASETS This year, two multimodal datasets will be shared. Each  dataset will have challenges at two levels. To facilitate the participation of researchers already used to work with log data, the first level will provide features already extracted    from the dierent modalities. The research question at this level will be to combine those features into a model that can infer a specific aspect of the learning process. The second level is oriented to signal processing researchers and consists of extracting relevant learning traces from raw recordings of dierent media (audio, video, digital pen, etc.). For both levels, the datasets will also provide ground truth against which the models and techniques can be evaluated. The datasets to be provided will be:  The Math Data Corpus[1]: This dataset involves 12 sessions, with small groups of three English-speaking stu- dents collaborating while solving mathematics problems. Data were collected on their natural multimodal communication and activity patterns during these problem-solving and peer tutoring sessions, including students speech, digital pen in- put, facial expressions, and physical movements. This dataset has been expanded with full manual and automatic tran- scripts of the students speech. It also contains more than 10.000 annotations of the students diagrams during problem solving. The main research questions behind this dataset will be automatic estimation of solution correctness, individ- ual expertise, group performance, group collaboration level and evidence of learning.  Oral Presentation Quality Corpus: This challenge includes a data corpus that involves 40 oral presentations of Spanish-speaking students in groups of 4 to 5 members presenting projects. The following data is available: speech, facial expressions and physical movements in video, skele- tal data gathered from Kinect for each individual, and slide presentation files. In addition grading for individuals when doing their presentations is included as well as a group-grade related to the quality of the slides used when doing each pre- sentation. This challenge seeks determine how multimodal techniques can help in evaluating presentation skills.  4. TARGET GROUPS Existing MLA researchers: This event is the annual  meeting venue for the existing MLA community. The datasets that will be part of this challenge are among the most re- searched topics in MLA.  New MLA researchers: It is one of the objectives of this workshop to attract new researchers from the Learning Analytics community to MLA. The low-barriers to partici- pate in the challenge will enable researchers that are used to alphanumerical-only data to test their approaches and techniques on data generated from multimodal signals.  LA researchers and practitioners: This workshop is also directed to the general Learning Analytics community. Researchers could attend the workshop to discover how to in- corporate new modes (such as speech, writing, gestures, etc.) to their current monomodal analysis. Practioners could at- tend the workshop to establish how MLA could help them to measure and feedback learning on real-world, non-computer- based contexts.  5. DISSEMINATION STRATEGY Apart from the dissemination of the call through tradi-  tional channels (mailing lists, web-site and relevant discus- sion fora), the organizers will identify and personally contact researchers both from the MLA and general Learning An- alytics communities to invite to apply their approaches to one or more of the challenges.  6. PROGRAM COMMITTEE The program committee is formed with members of the  MLA community, researchers of Multimodal Interaction and Learning Analytics. These members are: Michael Johnston (Interactions), Alejandro Andrade (Indiana University), Kate Thompson (University of Sydney), Engin Bumbacher (Stan- ford University), Mirko Raca (Ecole polytechnique federale de Lausanne), Richard Davis (Stanford University), Bertrand Schneider (Stanford University), Shuchi Grover (SRI Inter- national), Saad Khan (Educational Testing Service), Lei Chen (Educational Testing Service), Katherine Chiluiza (Es- cuela Superior Politecnica del Litoral)  7. FORMAT Following the successful experience of the previous MLA  challenges, this event will be organized around the analy- sis of two dierent datasets. The results of all the partici- pant teams will be collected, compared and contrasted. The participating teams and the audience are invited to discuss about the level of success of the presented approaches to solve the challenge and possible collaborations to improve the results.  8. SCHEDULE This will be a full-day workshop (6 hours). The sched-  ule will be: Introduction (15 minutes). Presentation of the datasets and challenges (30 minutes). Each tema Work on the challeges (2 hours). Lunch break. Oral Presentation Corpus at Level 1 and 2 (30 minutes). Critique of the ap- proaches for Oral Presentation Corpus Level 1 (30 minutes). Critique of the approaches for Math Data Corpus Level 2 (30 minutes). General discussion about the results for the Math Data Corpus (30 minutes). Coee break. Discussion about future collaboration and the MLA community (1 hour). Fi- nal remarks, future steps and conclusions (30 minutes).  9. REFERENCES [1] S. Oviatt, A. Cohen, and N. Weibel. Multimodal  learning analytics: description of math data corpus for icmi grand challenge workshop. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM on International conference on multimodal  interaction, pages 583590. ACM, 2013. [2] M. Worsley. Multimodal learning analytics: enabling  the future of learning through multimodal data analysis and interfaces. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on Multimodal interaction, pages 353356. ACM, 2012.    