Fostering 21st century literacies through a collaborative  critical reading and learning analytics environment: User-  perceived benefits and problematics Jennifer Pei-Ling Tan, Simon Yang, Elizabeth Koh, Christin Jonathan   National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore  jen.tan@nie.edu.sg  ABSTRACT  The affordances of learning analytics (LA) are being increasingly  harnessed to enhance 21st century (21C) pedagogy and learning.  Relatively rare, however, are use cases and empirically based  understandings of students actual experiences with LA tools and  environments at fostering 21C literacies, especially in secondary  schooling and Asian education contexts. This paper addresses this  knowledge gap by 1) presenting a first iteration design of a  computer-supported collaborative critical reading and LA  environment and its 16-week implementation in a Singapore high  school; and 2) foregrounding students quantitative and qualitative  accounts of the benefits and problematics associated with this  learning innovation. We focus the analytic lens on the LA  dashboard components that provided visualizations of students  reading achievement, 21C learning dispositions, critical literacy  competencies and social learning network positioning within the  class. The paper aims to provide insights into the potentialities,  paradoxes and pathways forward for designing LA that take into  consideration the voices of learners as critical stakeholders.     CCS Concepts   Human-centered computing~User centered design     Applied computing~Collaborative learning   Keywords  Learning analytics, CSCL, critical literacy, 21st century skills.   1. INTRODUCTION  Critical reading development is an essential component of strong  language and literacy skills, and thus fundamental to young  peoples productive participation in the 21C global knowledge  economy. But students commonly struggle with relating and  responding to English language (EL) texts on a personal level,  thereby failing to engage deeply and critically in reading tasks [1].   This has been attributed to two key reasons. First, texts used in EL  lessons are still predominantly print-based even though students  now interact largely with multimodal texts. Further, in  conventional EL curriculum and pedagogy, students have limited  opportunities to extend their reading practices in socially,  cognitively and technologically engaging ways, even though they  engage continually with rich and fluid social media platforms in   their personal time [2].  Second, students currently have limited  access to meaningful and timely formative feedback regarding  their reading engagement and their broader literacy development  [3], thereby significantly constraining their capacity to self- evaluate and positively modify their learning behaviors. Until  these issues are effectively addressed, students low levels of EL  engagement and weak critical reading skills are likely to persist,  with adverse effects on their language proficiencies, and 21C  capacitiescritical thinking, collaboration and communication.  This challenge is the impetus for our design, implementation and  evaluation of WiREAD, a web-based collaborative critical reading  and LA environment aimed at deepening critical reading  engagement levels, promoting self-regulated and collaborative  knowledge construction in EL among Singapore Secondary 3  (Grade 9) students, during and beyond formal class time.   2. TECHNO-PEDAGOGICAL DESIGN  WiREAD was designed with the primary objective of motivating  and helping students to develop richer dialogue and quality  interactions with peers around multimodal texts, thereby  deepening their appreciation of and connection to collaborative  and critical reading as a generative social practice. So, the techno- pedagogical design of WiREAD focused on 2 key learning  affordances: online peer interactions around reading, and the LA  dashboard.   2.1 Online Social Reading and Discussion  Space  In its pedagogical and curricular design, the web-based social  reading and discussion tool is underpinned by Vygotskian socio- constructivist theories, informed by a Multiliteracies pedagogical  framework, which foregrounds 4 essential dimensions of effective  contemporary literacy enculturation in learners: 1) situated  practice, 2) overt instruction, 3) critical framing, and 4)  transformed practice [4; 2]. The micro-level of pedagogical  scaffolding scripts drew from Paul-Elders wheel of critical  reasoning [5] and our own work on dialogic indicators of  collective creativity and criticality [6] to develop 7 critical lenses  (message, purpose, audience, assumption, point of view,  inference, impact of language/visuals) and 5 critical talk types (I  think that, I think so because, I agree, I disagree, I need to ask).   Together, these served as a schema for guiding students  collaborative critique of texts on WiREAD in that students are  required to tag each of their comments/replies with 1 critical lens  and 1 critical talk type (Figure 1). Furthermore, each critical lens  and critical talk type tag contained a popover that provided  students with question prompts and sentence starters. These  served as a constant referential resource reminding students how  each tag could be used to critique texts more deeply. A new  teacher-nominated multimodal text was uploaded each week over  a 16-week term. Students had a weekly 30-minute reading period  in school and personal time beyond curriculum time to read,  comment and reply to others posts on the texts.    Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for  components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be  honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or  republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior  specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from  Permissions@acm.org.  LAK '16, April 25 - 29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.  Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to  ACM. ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04...$15.00  DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883965       Figure 1: Texts, critical lenses, talk types, and popovers   Architecturally, WiREAD is built on WordPress, an open-source  PHP website creation tool, with additional plugins and in-house  programming codes to customize the functionalities for our  purposes. A major plugin, BuddyPress, enhanced the social  learning aspect where users can join singular or multiple groups,  and utilize interactive features including activities feed, personal  messaging and friendship system. As depicted in Figure 2, all data  are stored in a mysql database, with structural modifications made  to capture additional data required for the LA dashboard  component of the learning platform (see Section 2.2.).   Figure 2: WiREAD system architecture   2.2 Learning Analytics Dashboard  The LA affordance of WiREAD was designed with the aspiration  of providing rich, meaningful and timely formative feedback to  students and teachers throughout the term to help monitor reading  engagement and progress, and modify learning strategies and  pedagogical practices to improve outcomes. We focus here on the  student dashboard, which consisted of 4 separate components/tabs  visualizing a blend of EL achievement, dispositional, discourse,  content and social network analytics [7]:  (i) My Reading Achievement: data on students reading grades   on school-based assessments throughout the term captured in  teachers centralized information portal;   (ii) My Learning Attitudes and 21C Skills: data from student  self-report questionnaires administered at the start and end of  each term, using pre-validated measures of productive 21C  learning dispositions [8], including mastery/performance goal  orientations, deep/surface learning, task value, self-efficacy  and engagement, student-teacher relatedness, cognitive  playfulness (curiosity and creativity), criticality, collaboration  and communication;   (iii)  My WiREAD Critique & Discussion Profile: data on  students online engagement based on the frequency and   length of comments and replies, and frequency of each  critical lens and critical talk type across texts;   (iv) My Social Learning Network Map: sociograms reflecting  students position and influence within the WiREAD  learning network (ties based on students online discussion of  texts with others) and the class learning network (ties based  on students nomination of who and how often they  approached classmates to discuss texts critically).   These data indicators and corpuses were retrieved using PHP  functions integrated into the WordPress framework. In this  process, data was checked and sorted. Application algorithms  were applied to the data, with processed data parsed to the  visualization handler where the final data is presented to the end  user in interactive visualized models (Figure 3).     Figure 3: Learning dashboard visualizations (selected only)   3. STUDENTS EVALUATIVE ACCOUNTS  OF LA DASHBOARD  To develop more nuanced insights into the potentialities,  paradoxes and pathways forward for designing LA, we ask how  do students describe the benefits of and problems with the various  LA dashboard components and visualizations   3.1 Methods and Measures  In this study, we used a design-based research approach  supplemented by a quasi-experimental design. Pre/post-tests and  self-reported questionnaires, and qualitative feedback forms and  focus groups conducted at the start and end of the 16-week  innovation term together formed the impact evaluation of  WiREAD relating to its online social reading and discussion  space, and its LA dashboard. The Secondary 3 (Grade 9, 15-year  old) student participants comprised 3 WiREAD classes (N=116)  and 3 control classes (N=92). Here, we report and discuss the  WiREAD classes mixed methods evaluative accounts of the  student LA dashboard component.   Evaluative measures in the quantitative questionnaire included  (but were not limited to) a perceived ease of use scale (4 items), a  perceived usefulness scale (16 items measuring 4 key productive     learning dimensions [9]: i) socialization, (ii) expression of identity  & opinions, (iii) development of 21C skills & dispositions, (iv)  academic learning & performance), and a 4-item scale of how  helpful each of the four LA dashboard components were for  students learning and growth. All scales reported strong internal  consistency and confirmatory factor analysis scores (available  upon request). Student focus groups were conducted with 30  students (10 from each of the 3 WiREAD classes), purposively  selected to reflect diverse users with a range of low to high levels  of WiREAD usage, reading achievement, and vocality in class.  Remaining students (N=86) completed a qualitative feedback  form on the aspects of WiREAD they found to be useful or  otherwise for their learning and why.   4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  4.1 Quantitative Evaluative Findings  Descriptive analysis of questionnaire responses showed that  students found the LA dashboard easy to use, navigate and  understand (M=5.54 on a scale of 1-very difficult to 7-very easy,  SD=1.02). In general, they were moderately positive regarding  each dashboard components helpfulness to their learning and  growth (Figure 4), and regarding the overall dashboards  usefulness for enhancing our identified key 21C productive  learning dimensions (Figure 5).      Figure 4: Dashboard components helpful for learning/growth      Figure 5: Dashboard useful for enhancing 21C learning   4.2 Qualitative Evaluative Accounts & Insights  Students qualitative accounts of the LA dashboard provide  deeper insights into the experienced realities, promises and  problematics of such contemporary learning affordances.   4.2.1 User-perceived benefits of LA dashboard  We elaborate here on the 3 overarching themes that emerged from  students qualitative accounts of the LA dashboards perceived  learning benefits, namely, 1) generating greater awareness and   reflection of learning profile and progress, 2) enhancing learning  motivation and engagement (cognitive, affective and behavioral),  and 3) cultivating reciprocal social citizenry in learning.   Students repeatedly described the LA dashboard and its various  components as most informative in terms of making visible their  learning progress, dispositions and behaviors, which they implied  were usually vague or invisible to them: The [WiREAD  Critique/Discussion Profile] section shows how much comments  and replies we have done each week. This is very useful as it  serves as a reminder to write comments on texts we have not  done. It also encourages me to be more active as I often visit this  section to see my progress and effort (St8, 3R7). Similarly, St22  (3R6) stated, My WiRead Discussion Data and My Social  Learning Network Profile were also useful in monitoring my  progress and to encourage me to post and comment more and  have better quality comments. They also help to show which skills  and [critical] lenses I have not used, which allows me to know  which skills I should practice more on, and for Reading  Achievement dashboard, I found the EL achievement data most  usefulas I was able to gauge how much progress for EL I have  made as well as how I fair against other students. Through this, I  know what I can work on in order to improve (St19, 3R1).   Students frequently converged on the Learning Attitudes and 21C  Skills dashboard as the most eye-opening in helping them  discover and find out strengths and weaknesses that they did  not previously know about themselves: I found that My Learning  Attitudes and 21C Skills were the most useful. This dashboard  allowed me to realize what type of attitude I had towards learning  English and the way that I was trying to achieve my EL goals. I've  come to realize that my attitude towards EL was not the best as I  only learnt for the sake of doing well in exams not for the sake of  understanding the language. Thus looking at it, I am trying to  change my learning habits and attitude towards English in a  better and more positive direction (St1, 3R7). This reinforces the  need for schools to place more overt emphasis on developing  students 21C literacies and dispositions, given their salience in  predicting academic, employment and life outcomes [10, 11].   In all of the accounts, frequently heard among the participant  cohort were students attributions of strong links between greater  learner awareness as a precursor for enhanced learning motivation  and engagementcognitive, affective and behavioral [12]:  shows me where I standmotivates me to work harder,  motivate me to help or get help from my friends, force me  to think deeper, and makes me more motivated to comment so  that my [social network] dot can be bigger and brighter, and I  will know who to look to for help. This concurs with much LA  research on the potential of visible learning for promoting self- regulated learning [13], providing further empirical confirmation  that learner autonomy, competence and relatedness are vital to  intrinsic motivation and sustained behavioral change [14].  Also noteworthy was the recognition among students that the LA  dashboard, especially its social network analytics, bore much  value for nurturing a disposition we term reciprocal social  citizenry. This refers to a capacity to shift ones focus away from  self-interest and self-sufficiency to engage in productive help- giving and help-seeking learning behaviors: the spider web, some  of our names, the bubbles were bigger, right So it showed us like  who can we find like if we ever need any help in English. And  some of the people, whose bubbles are like smaller, they are out of  the web thing, so we can like we can just ask them whether they  need any help. But such insights on the value of the social  network map in promoting social responsibility and peer support     in learning were not common among students. We elaborate on  this problematic in Section 4.2.2.2.   4.2.2 Two corresponding problematics  Students qualitative accounts of the benefits gained from the LA  dashboard, however, drew opposing counterpoints from other  peers, thus providing insights into the ambivalence reflected in  responses on the usefulness of the dashboard for their learning and  growth. 2 key problematics were gleaned from the student talk: 1)  the ironic nature of norm-referenced vs. criterion-referenced  visualizations for motivating learning, and 2) the inherently low  levels of connective literacy among students.  4.2.2.1 LA visualizations a double-edged sword  Students were polarized in their views of norm-referenced visual  analytics as indicators of academic and social standing among  peers, and thus as a motivating mechanism for learning. For  many, knowing where they stand in class, if they are below  the average or at the edge of the network made them more  determined to increase [their] level of participation, to work  harder, be more active and improve their learning behaviors  online. Further, students often alluded to the inherent fun and  interesting nature of the visualizations as stimulating a form of  healthy peer pressure and informal competition that drives  them to engage with learning in more substantive ways: the  spider web would like, for me, it looks like a mini game, so that  its a race to get to the center and to get as big as you can (St12,  3R7). Higher-performing students in the classes even called for a  more formalized ranking system or hall of fame, asserting that  this leads to advancement and constant usage of WiREAD  (St25, 3R7).   There were, however, opposing views, and some pointed to the  adverse affective effects of clearly seeing oneself in relation to  others in the class, especially if one is at the bottom (My  Reading Achievement), or at the outside (My Social Learning  Network Profile): It was demoralizing sometimes. You look  like you are below average on the chart then the class average  is so high, and the maximum mark you are supposed to get is so  high, then you are below averageit was demoralizing  depressing to see that classmates are better at commenting or  thinking skills (St5, 3R7), and after several classes, I have  found out that working to a brighter and larger spot has turned  into a competitionthis provides added stress that we do not  need, as people have their own pace of learning and may be  slower. The slow pace of learning may be laughed at by  classmates and thus it is not as useful for learning as it may  emotionally affect others (St14, 3R6).   Students holding this view often asserted that learning  visualizations are most helpful when they are criterion-based and  self-referenced, rather than norm-referenced to peers: seriously, I  think what matters most is actually yourself instead of other  people it actually has some psychology effect. You shouldn't  compare with anybody else cause even though this is  collaborative learning, its really more of self-learning in the end  (Stu3, 3R1); and the purpose of comparing with others is to make  you improve to so-called match other peoples level, but  comparing with yourself would, can actually have the same effect  cause you are trying to improve based on your past. Comparing  with yourself will be more suitable. If like for example, the week  before you commented less, then you think like Oh yes, I actually  commented more [this week], I feel better, instead of comparing  with others like What Im last, what is this Not fair then you  cry (St8, 3R1).    This reinforces the use of intrinsic motivation mechanisms in the  design of LA to foster a mastery-oriented mindset that has been  shown to result in more adaptive outcomes relative to a  performance-oriented mindset [15]. It also foregrounds recent  positive psychology understandings that emphasize personal  best achievement goals as a highly salient predictor of students  academic motivation and engagement [16]. Moreover, it reminds  LA designers to be cognizant of the restrictive effects of one- sized-fits-all approaches to assessment and pedagogy in  conventional schooling [17], and the need to develop richer, more  nuanced and proximal multi-dimensional analytics [18], such that  differentiated instruction can become an experienced reality for  students, with purposefully-designed LA serving to compress,  rather than exacerbate, the learning and achievement gap between  thriving and struggling students.   4.2.2.2 Fostering connective literacy an imperative  for adolescent learners  A second issue became apparent from students talk around their  experiences with the dashboardlow levels of connective  literacy amongst adolescent learners. This has implications for  not only LA designers and pedagogues, but for a wider  educational community committed to helping students become  productive and engaged citizens beyond school. We conceptualise  and define connective literacy as the capacity to see learning as  an adaptive and fluid networked activity, where social positioning  is seen as constituting a form of learning capital requiring active  nurturing and reciprocal transactivity with significant others.   In other words, connectively-literate students recognize that the  opportunity to see their individual positioning within the larger  class network can prompt them to 1) find out the people that  [they] can actually approach for English, to seek help from  prominent others so as to improve and learn from them; 2) to  diversify and expand the circle of people whom [they] discuss  English texts with to take part in more conversations with the  whole class, instead of just the people [they] know better as  friends, thereby mak[ing them] think more, and also 3) to show  consideration to others at the side with hardly any connection  [to] try to see their comments more, and reply to their comments.   But this view was relatively nascent and yet to emerge among  many student participants. Most students consistently privileged  individual learning outcomes and skill acquisition as way more  important than social learning connections: To me, it doesnt  matter who Im connected to. As long as I can approach the text  with different critical lenses, it is useful and helpful. My Social  Learning Network Profile does not help me learn anything (St8,  3R1); others referred to social learning network profile as a  redundant system, because all it really did was show who  worked with who more. It had no real significant purpose to help  with my learning (St29, 3R1), with yet others stating that all Im  interested in is the content of the comments (St1, 3R6). To many  of these students, social networks have little bearing for learning  and growth, with network centrality or prominence being  trivialized as promoting a superfluous social butterfly  syndrome, at the expense of more serious learners those who  truly like to comment and learn (St10, 3R6).   So, we acknowledge the need for a critical evaluation of  WiREADs social learning network dashboard design and  pedagogical value. Nevertheless, these students accounts reflect a  highly nave, scientifically erroneous view of the power of social  networks and how these extensively influence ideas, emotions,  behaviors, learning and more [19]. This in turn brings to our  attention an often-overlooked imperativethat educators of     young leaners today need to be much more intentional and  purposeful in efforts to develop an empirically-informed  appreciation for the power of adaptive and reciprocal social  networked capitalas a form of new fundamental literacy  essential to successful learning, living and earning in  contemporary societies.   5. LIMITATIONS & WAYS FORWARD  To conclude, we highlight some limitations and ways forward.  WiREAD is only in its first design iteration, and we are conscious  of the LA dashboards rudimentary visualizations. There is room  for further enhancements to its user interface and aesthetic  features. Second, we are consulting with colleagues to incorporate  richer and more proximal indicators and analytics, and in  particular automated semantic and discourse analytics [7] that can  better assess the quality of critical reading and thinking reflected  in students discursive practices. Relying on students self-tagging  of critical lenses and critical talk types leads to large variations  and may be of limited validity. We are also working on  developing the teacher dashboard, to improve the adaptability of  pedagogical strategies with regard to learners needs and interests.  We aim to improve the pedagogical sensitivity and responsiveness  of both the LA dashboard and the teacher-pedagogue, in  recognition of the tight coupling between extrinsic pedagogical  scaffolding and intrinsic self-regulated learning [20].   The preliminary findings reported in this paper relate only to the  first of three design, implementation and evaluation cycles to be  conducted over the next 18 months. We hope, however, that the  data and discussion presented here fill some gaps in LA  researchby foregrounding secondary student-users perceptions  and experiences associated with the design and impact of LA for  their overall learning and growth, while shedding some light on  relevant aspects of Asian edu-cultural contexts. We have also  attempted to underscore some less discernible educational  problematics that underlie LA design, relating to both  instrumental and conceptual debates that are featured in the fields  scholarly discourse. It is in the collective deliberation of these  problematics that the transformative power of LA can be further  realized for more meaningful, equitable and future-relevant  educational outcomes and social life trajectories for learners.   6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This paper draws from project NRF2013-EDU001-EL019, funded  by the edulab Research Program, Singapore National Research  Foundation. The views expressed in this paper are the authors  and do not necessarily represent the views of NIE Singapore.   7. REFERENCES  [1] Garcia, A., Mirra, N., Morrell, E., Martinez, A. and Scorza, D.   2015. The Council of Youth Research: Critical Literacy and  Civic Agency in the Digital Age. Reading & Writing  Quarterly, 31, 2, 151-167.   [2] Tan, J.P-L., and McWilliam, E. 2009. From Literacy to  Multiliteracies: Diverse Learners and Pedagogical  Practice. Pedagogies: An International Journal, 4, 3, 213-225.    [3] Davison, C. 2013. Innovation in assessment: Common  misconceptions and problems. Innovation and change in  English language education, 263-275.   [4] Cope, B. and Kalantzis, M. 2015. A Pedagogy of  Multiliteracies: Learning by Design. Palgrave Macmillan   [5] Paul, R. and Elder, L. 2001. Critical Thinking: Tools for  taking charge of your learning and your life. Prentice Hall,  Upper Saddle River, NJ.   [6] Tan, J.P-L., Caleon, I.S., Jonathan, C.R., and Koh, E. 2014. A  dialogic framework for assessing collective creativity in  computer-supported collaborative problem-solving tasks.  Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 9,  3, 411-437.   [7] Ferguson, R. and Buckingham Shum, S. 2012. Social  learning analytics: five approaches. In Proceedings of the  2nd International Conference on Learning Analytics &  Knowledge, 2333.   [8] Tan, J.P-L. and Nie, Y.Y. 2015. The role of authentic tasks in  promoting 21st century learning dispositions in Mathematics.  In Authentic Problem Solving and Learning in the 21st  Century, Y. H. Cho, I. S. Caleon and M. Kapur, Eds.  Springer Science+Business Media Singapore Pte Ltd,  Singapore, 19-39.   [9] Tan, J. P. L. 2009. Digital kids, analogue students: a mixed  methods study of students' engagement with a school-based  Web 2.0 learning innovation. Doctoral thesis. ID Code:   30396, Queensland University of Technology.   [10] Tempelaar, D. T., Rienties, B., and Giesbers, B. 2015. In  search for the most informative data for feedback generation:  Learning Analytics in a data-rich context. Computers in  Human Behavior, 47, 157-167.   [11] Levin, H. M. 2012. More than just test scores. Prospects, 42,  3, 269-284.   [12] Wang, M. T. and Eccles, J. S. 2012. Adolescent behavioral,  emotional, and cognitive engagement trajectories in school  and their differential relations to educational success.  Journal of Research on Adolescence, 22, 1, 31-39.   [13] Lockyer, L., Heathcote, E. and Dawson, S. 2013. Informing  pedagogical action: Aligning learning analytics with learning  design. American Behavioral Scientist, 0002764213479367.   [14] Wise, A. F. 2014. Designing pedagogical interventions to  support student use of learning analytics. In Proceedings of  the 4th International Conference on Learning Analytics And  Knowledge, 203-211.   [15] Dweck, C. 2012. Mindset: How you can fulfil your potential.  Hachette UK.   [16] Martin, A. J. and Elliot, A. J. 2015. The role of personal best  (PB) and dichotomous achievement goals in students  academic motivation and engagement: a longitudinal  investigation. Educational Psychology, 1-18.   [17] Gaevi, D., Dawson, S., Rogers, T. and Gasevic, D. 2015.  Learning analytics should not promote one size fits all: The  effects of instructional conditions in predicating academic  success. The Internet and Higher Education, 28, 68-84.   [18] Dawson, S. and Siemens, G. 2014. Analytics to literacies:  The development of a learning analytics framework for  multiliteracies assessment. The International Review of  Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 15, 4.   [19] Christakis, N. A. and Fowler, J. H. 2009. Connected: The  surprising power of our social networks and how they shape  our lives. Little, Brown.   [20] Azevedo, R., Moos, D. C., Greene, J. A., Winters, F. I. and  Cromley, J. G. 2008. Why is externally-facilitated regulated  learning more effective than self-regulated learning with  hypermedia Educational Technology Research and  Development, 56, 1, 45-       