The Relationship Between Educational  Performance and Online Access Routines:  Analysis of Students Access to an Online   Discussion Forum     Tariq M. Khan  Brunel Business School,   Uxbridge, UB8 3PH, London, UK   tariq.khan@brunel.ac.uk       Fintan Clear  Brunel Business School,   Uxbridge, UB8 3PH, London, UK   fintan.clear@brunel.ac.uk       Samira Sadat Sajadi  Brunel Business School,   Uxbridge, UB8 3PH, London, UK   samirasadat.sajadi@brunel.a c.uk   ABSTRACT  A study of behaviour patterns associated with students accessing  an online discussion forum is presented. Data collected on the  frequency of access and the duration of sessions is analysed to  establish several categories of learners, which depict the  differences among the cohort in terms of participation in social  learning. A British business school course for second year  undergraduates was studied over two years (i.e. two cohorts) and  the results were combined to derive categories of learner types.  We conclude that that academic attainment does not appear to be  related to student access behaviour necessarily.   Categories and Subject Descriptors   K.3.1 [Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in  Education   collaborative learning   General Terms  Measurement, Design.   Keywords  learning analytics; online discussion; participation patterns   1. INTRODUCTION  Social media is described as a web-based service that allows  individuals to construct a profile within an organized  framework, to generate a list of other users with whom they  share a connection, and to navigate their own list of connections  and view those made by others within the system [1]. Thus  social networks use the Web to facilitate their communications  as one element of what has been termed Web 2.0 - a term  coined by OReilly [2] and which has come to be used to  describe a wide range of Internet-based information and  communication technology (ICT) applications that offer the  potential for significantly increased interactivity with a high  degree of communication, cooperation, collaboration and   connection [3] between users. More recently attention has  turned to how these new applications can facilitate educational  attainment. It is often recognised that a constructivist  perspective is most appropriate for understanding learning  through social media. Insights on student behaviour and  academic performance however are relatively limited in the  research literature. Our intention here is to analyse access  patterns to a discussion forum within a VLE (virtual learning  environment) to determine a taxonomy of online learners and to  understand types of access pattern most conducive to learning.      2. ONLINE IDENTITY & COMMUNITY  2.1 Learning Theory  Social Learning Theory [4] sees environmental (i.e. social) and  psychological factors influencing behaviour with retention  (remembering what one observes), reproduction (recreating  that behaviour), and motivation (having good reason to  recreate that behaviour) as critical cognitive aspects.  Motivation in these terms resonates with the ideas of Whyte  [5] who advocated getting students to accept personal  responsibility for their own learning, and, as long as the  individual has some inherent ability, better academic progress is  made. However some form of guidance or scaffolding is  required for learners which needs to be built into the educational  infrastructure, or online learning environment.     Social Development Theory [6] argues that social interaction  precedes intellectual development, with consciousness and  cognition being the end product of social behaviour. Thus the  connections between people and the sociocultural context in  which they interact are critical for such development [7]. Thus  Vygotsky challenges the traditional instructionist model of  learning whereby teachers transmit information to students,  and offers in its place learning contexts in which students  themselves take an active role in enabling their learning.     In this analysis of social constructivism, Vygotskys Zone of  Proximal Development (ZPD) appears to chime to some extent  with the Community of Practice (CoP) concept [8] whereby  novices firstly undertake learning from a position of Legitimate  Peripheral Participation (LPP). Lave and Wenger argue that  learning is situated such that it is embedded within activity,  context and culture. However intentionality is not necessarily      Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for   personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,   or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior  specific permission and/or a fee.  LAK12, 29 April  2 May 2012, Vancouver, BC, Canada    Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1111-3/12/04$10.00.       226    assumed here and can be an incidental or vicarious outcome of  the interactions occurring within a community of practice.     2.2 Empirical Evidence   Though proponents argue for the use of social media as an  educative tool, empirical studies are not plentiful. Heo et al. [9]  examine online interaction amongst a set of students engaged in  project-based learning and show that levels of academic  achievement do not always reflect quantity of online interaction,  while quality of interaction appears to be critical relationship to  academic outcomes. Social media as a distraction is noted by  Junco [10] who finds Facebook usage and scholarship to be  negatively correlated: the frequency of engagement with  Facebook has a negative correlation with the amount of time  spent by students preparing for class. In the same vein Junco and  Cotten [11] find that students who spend more time chatting  online than their peers report greater levels of academic  impairment. Such evidence shows social media holding back  rather than supporting student learning. This view chimes with  Kubey et al. [12] who find heavy recreational Internet use  highly correlated with impaired academic performance. Such  observations prompted us to investigate student access patterns  to an online discussion board and their apparent learning.      3. METHODOLOGY  The investigation took place over two years (2009-2011) on an  undergraduate course on Project Management.  Students on the  course were from different degree pathways so the class  included diverse academic interests as well as diverse  demographics (e.g. gender, race, age, etc.).  The task given to  the student cohort was to form teams of 4-6 people in order to  undertake a project assignment. Students were informed that the  group activity did not attract academic credit per se, but was  essential for a subsequent activity which did attract credit. This  follow-on activity required students on an individual basis to  produce short critical accounts reflecting on their team working  experience in the first activity. Thus, without sufficient  involvement in the group activity, students would find it difficult  to complete the reflective account (the second activity).  Communications amongst the team members in the group  activity were to be conducted through an online discussion  application (Blackboard). The first year of the study (2009/10)  involved 160 active students on the discussion forum, while the  second year (2010/11) involved 143 active students. Only those  students who submitted the second assignment were considered  to be active.     Analysis of the data derived from the discussion forum involved  a hierarchical cluster analysis to identify subgroups amongst the  class, as well as tests of difference amongst groups (t-tests) and  tests of association among factors (Pearson correlation).      4. RESULTS  An initial hierarchical cluster analysis (Wards linkage on  Euclidean distance) was performed on the data set for each year  separately.    Year 2010/11   This procedure distinguished several groups on dimensions  related to variables extracted from the analytics data: the  average interval between online sessions (AIn); and the average  duration of an online session (ADu). We see that there are five   major groups of students formed when differentiating on the  variables introduced above, with the primary differentiator being  ADu at a height of h=7.77 (i.e. a considerable difference  amongst the two top-level clusters).  The top-level clusters  consisted of n=87 students with average durations per session of  less than 9 minutes, and n=56 students with average duration per  session of greater than 9 minutes (the cut-off point of 9 minutes  was chosen from the dendogram by visual inspection).     The second level clusters were divided on the basis of average  interval between sessions. For the group with relatively shorter  ADu, a first division at h=6.94 was made, though a subsequent  division at h=4.05 serves to better define three distinct clusters.  The height of h=4.05 indicates a relatively high distinction  amongst clusters. The sizes of the sub-clusters were n=54, n=26  and n=7, divided at average interval per session of 1-5 days, 5- 12 days, and more than 12 days respectively. The alternative  group with comparatively longer ADu was divided at h=4.01,  with cluster sizes of n=41 for 1-5 days, and n=15 for more than  5 days. No further divisions were made due to small height  values which could not provide reliable sub-clusters.     We can define the five clusters on the basis of their average  interval between sessions and the average duration of a session.    Cluster 1, n=54: Short interval between sessions and short  duration per session  Cluster 2, n=26: Medium interval between sessions and short  duration per session  Cluster 3, n=7: Long interval between sessions and short  duration per session  Cluster 4, n=41: Short interval between sessions and long  duration per session  Cluster 5, n=15: Long interval between sessions and long  duration per session  Note that no clear cluster emerged with medium interval   between sessions and long duration per session.     A test of difference between means (independent samples t-test)  confirmed no significant difference between clusters formed on  final assignment mark. A one-way ANOVA test was conducted  on the three sub-clusters divided at h=4.05 (Levenes statistic  F=.515, p=.599 confirms homogeneity of variance). Results  indicate there is a statistically significant difference between  groups (F (2.77) = 5.878, p = .004). A Tukey post-hoc test  reveals that the final mark attained in the follow-up assignment  is statistically significantly higher for average interval per  session of between 1 and 5 days (1<AIn<5) (59.9  10.3  percent) compared to 5AIn<11 (53.5  11.8 percent, p = .047)  and AIn11 (46.87  13.2 percent, p = .010). There was no  statistically significant difference between clusters 5AIn<11  and AIn11 (p = .300).    Correlation analysis at the level of clusters indicates some  interesting associations.     Cluster 1: r = -0.387, p=0.01, n=54. Moderate indirect  correlation between access span (period between first and last  access) and average interval between sessions.  Cluster 2: r = 0.462, p=0.05, n=26. Moderate direct correlation  between assignment mark and the average number of messages  read per session.  Cluster 3: r = 0.875, p=0.01, n=7. Strong direct correlation  between assignment mark and access span.   227    r = 0.831, p=0.05, n=7. Strong direct correlation between access  span and average messages read per session.  Cluster 4: n=41. No significant correlations.  Cluster 5: r = 0.555, p=0.05, n=15. Moderate direct correlation  between average duration of a session and average number of  messages read per session.   Year 2009/10   The analysis procedure was repeated on the data for year  2009/10. Analysis revealed several groups distinguished on  dimensions related to variables extracted from the analytics data:  The average interval between online sessions (AIn); average  duration of an online session (ADu); and the average number of  discussion messages read during an online session (AMr). As  with Year 2010/11, we can define five clusters for Year 2009/10  on the basis of their average interval between sessions and the  average duration of a session, though the clusters were not as  highly distinct as for Year 2010/11. Cut-off height of h=2.09 to  achieve five clusters, but top level h=7.77, and as with Year  2010/11, the value of h (incidentally identical) indicates a  considerable difference between the two top-level clusters.   However, in contrast to Year 2010/11, the division at h=7.77 is  based on average interval per session (AIn) rather than average  duration per session (ADu).    A test of difference between means (independent samples t-test)  revealed no significant difference in final assignment mark  between clusters. A one-way ANOVA test was conducted on the  three sub-clusters divided at h=2.09 (Levenes statistic F=.975,  p=.423 confirms homogeneity of variance). Results indicate  there are no statistically significant differences between clusters  1, 2, and 3 on the basis of final assignment marks.     Analysis of analytics data over two years has revealed some  consistent results, yet there remain a number of issues that the  data are unable to resolve. First we should note that student  access patterns can be defined using the two parameters of (a)  average interval between sessions, and (b) average duration of  each session. A number of distinct clusters can be produced  using just these two parameters, though their exact inter- relationship is not clear from the analysis. In one year, average  interval was the primary differentiator, whereas for the  alternative year, average duration was predominant. The more  important concern, though, is the composition of clusters along  behavioural patterns, and the relationships between dimensions  of behaviour and attainment.    Commonalities across the two samples point to common  behaviour across years on some dimensions. Clusters 1, 3, and 5  are similar over the two studies, though clusters 2 and 4 describe  different behaviours. To help with the organisation of the  discussion, we introduce a framework composed of labels to  distinguish the different types of learners we observed over the  two years of the study. This is shown in Figure 1.    5. DISCUSSION  The application of Weiner's Attribution Theory [13] allows one  to make determinations of the reasons (causes) for the observed  behaviour of participants. Analytics data provide the  observations from which one can draw conclusions about the  students' motivations and intentions, given the assumption that  their behaviour is deliberate and, for the most part, stable. Thus,  the proceeding discussion is premised on the assumption that   observed behaviour is indicative of intention, which permits one  to make attributions of cause for the observations. Of course,  such attributions remain conjecture and unverified, wherein lies  a limitation of the work reported here.     Figure 1: Learner types based on access behaviour   patterns    An important determinant in the area of social learning is the  actions of others, which will in some great part impinge on the  experience had by a participant, and consequently, help  determine their response (i.e. remain online and observe, post  messages, engage in a chat, etc.). Attribution to external causes  (i.e. other participants) must feature prominently in an analysis  of observed behaviour within social media. It should also be  remembered that Social Development Theory [6] would place  the emphasis on social interaction for individual development,  while Bandura's social learning theory would highlight the role  of observation as a valuable component of a vicarious approach  to learning from others. Evidence of observation is shown in the  predominance of message reading over message posting, with  many of the learner types choosing to dip into and out of the  social artefacts in order to catch-up on things without significant  reciprocal contribution.     If we accept both views on learning (i.e. social development  and social learning) then there is a place for both interaction  and observation in a social learning process. However, as we see  from our data, preference for one view over the other seems  evident. Learner type 3 (inquisitive) and Learner type 7  (committed) are the two groups that demonstrate some level of  adherence to the principles of socially-constructed knowledge.  For these two groups of learners, attribution of causes for their  sustained levels of participation may be due to internal factors,  such as innate high levels of determination. Intrinsic motivation  assumes an attitude in the participant that places control over  attainment within oneself. Self-agency, therefore, is the driving  force that determines the extent to which committed and  inquisitive learners expend effort in influencing the group. By  contrast, it may be deduced that the remaining learner types are  not determined by a strong sense of self-agency within the  context of group work, and consequently, tend not to engage in  social development which would require active continual  interaction with others. At best, the remaining learner types  seem to adopt an observer role in efforts to learn vicariously.     One should not forget that social learning is not mediated by  observation after the fact (i.e. observation of historic activity),   228    but should be contemporaneous with the authentic activity being  learned. Thus, reading a trail of messages is not of itself  equivalent to participation in the construction process   primarily this is because such an approach is devoid of any  affordances for real-time exchanges with the active members of  the society being so observed.     With respect to the effectiveness of such illegitimate social  learning, an important consideration is cognitive loading [14],  which may impact on the observer's ability to comprehend the  considerable amount of accumulated knowledge in the form of  dozens or even hundreds of message exchanges. Reading alone  does not translate into learning, particularly in an electronically- created social environment that is far removed from the realities  of face-to-face team exchanges with their informationally-rich  cues (e.g. sounds, locations, visual and aural perceptions, etc.).  Without the combination of multimodal sensory inputs,  textually-based communications lack the potential for yielding  contextually-rich integrated knowledge that are conveyed  through visual and auditory channels. Thus social learning  conducted through a discussion board format consisting of  historic collections of message exchanges fails to live up to the  expectations and demands of an authentic social learning  experience in which learners are able to observe the visual as  well as the verbal cues of their peers (and experts), to process  those cues progressively without overloading their cognitive  capacities, and to re-affirm their understanding through  expression and feedback.     Although one may be able to recreate a community in a social  media environment, production of an authentic practice is  more problematic. Progression within the community of practice  is hard to facilitate therefore without continual authentic  exchanges intended to share experiences.  Those learners who  merely visit the community to observe would rarely be  considered to be participating in the practice, and therefore,  could not expect to benefit from the social nature of the media.      Whatever may be the drawbacks of an electronically-mediated  forum, learning can be an incidental product of participation in  online discussion, as evidenced by the committed learner type  (Figure 1). While their academic attainment did not noticeably  improve, the strengthening of their social ties and their  acceptance by the community as a valuable member of the  network are, arguably, important consequences of efforts to  enter the community through sustained contributions. Whether  the behaviour of the purposive, directed, strategic,  detached, and apathetic learner types can be explained by  their preference for an asocial approach to their personal  learning, or as being due to other moderating factors such as  introverted personalities, insufficient time, social reticence, low  level of motivation, non-acceptance in the community, or any  other form of action by others, is not clear from the data.   What we do learn is that any attempt to interpret behaviour  patterns from analytics data alone is fraught with vagaries  offering multiple competing explanations.     7. CONCLUSION  This study notes results that point to discernible VLE access  patterns, with interpretations of the intentions and motivations of  learners of several types. From this analysis a framework is  presented that identifies and relates seven types of learners on  the dimensions of access span and access duration. The  framework recognises learner types lying on a two-dimensional   spectrum that extends from purely instructivist to fully  constructivist. In reality, all learners lie in between the extremes  and demonstrate aspects of both learning approaches. The VLE  permits social interaction but interchange amongst participants  alone is inadequate as a means of raising performance levels.  Improvements in attainment are not clearly determined by  behaviour patterns, and intrinsic motivators are perhaps the  reason for variations in these patterns. In a context devoid of  adequate extrinsic motivators, emphasis must be on nurturing  intrinsic motivation in order to encourage more active  participation where the pedagogic goal is experience of the  process of social construction through interaction rather than  knowledge of the artefacts thus produced.    The results are preliminary in nature and must be considered  indicative rather than substantive.  Further work should include  the development of research instruments to test for the  substantive nature of the learner types, and to determine the  consequence of each type for learner attainment, group cohesion  and the viability of a social media-based learning environment.    REFERENCES  [1] Amichai-Hamburger, Y., Kaplan, H., & Dorpatcheon, N.  (2008), Click to the past: The impact of extroversion by users of  nostalgic website on the use of Internet social services,  Computers in Human Behavior, 24, 19071912.  [2] OReilly, T. (2005) What Is Web 2.0 Design Patterns and   Business Models for the Next Generation of Software   (http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/  what-is-web-20.htmlpage=1)   [3] Cook, N, (2008), Enterprise 2.0, Aldershot: Gower  [4] Bandura, A. (1977), Social Learning Theory, General  Learning Press  [5] Whyte, C. (1980), An integrated counseling and learning  center, in K. Lauridsen (ed.) Examining the scope of learning  centers, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 33-43.  [6] Vygotsky, L.S. (1978), Mind and society: The development  of higher mental processes, Cambridge, MA: Harvard  University Press.  [7] Crawford, K. (1996), Vygotskian approaches to human   development in the information era, Educational Studies in  Mathematics, (31) 43-62.  [8] Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991), Situated Learning:  Legitimate Peripheral Participation, Cambridge, UK:  Cambridge University Press.  [9] Heo, H., Lim, K. and Kim, Y. (2010), Exploratory study on  the patterns of online interaction and knowledge co-construction  in project-based learning, Computers & Education, Vol. 55(3),  pp. 1383-1392.   [10] Junco, R. (2011), The relationship between frequency of  Facebook use, participation in Facebook activities, and student  engagement, Computers & Education, 58, pp. 162171.  [11] Junco, R. and Cotten, S. (2010), Perceived academic effects  of instant messaging use, Computers & Education, 56 (2), pp.  370378.  [12] Kubey, R., Lavin, M. and Barrows, J. (2001), Internet Use  and Collegiate Academic Performance Decrements: Early  Findings, Journal of Communication, June, pp. 366-382.  [13] Weiner, B. (1974), Achievement motivation and attribution  theory, Morristown, N.J.:  General Learning Press.  [14] Chandler, P. and Sweller, J. (1996), Cognitive Load While  Learning to Use a Computer Program, Applied Cognitive  Psychology, Vol. 10(2), pp. 151170.    229      