
Predicting Student Performance on Post-requisite Skills 
Using Prerequisite Skill Data: An Alternative Method for 

Refining Prerequisite Skill Structures 
 

Seth A. Adjei 
Worcester Polytechnic Institute 

100 Institute Road 
Worcester, MA 01609-2280 

saadjei@wpi.edu

 
Anthony F. Botelho 

Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
100 Institute Road 

Worcester, MA 01609-2280 
abotelho@wpi.edu 

 
Neil T. Heffernan 

Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
100 Institute Road 

Worcester, MA 01609-2280 
nth@wpi.edu 

 
ABSTRACT 
Prerequisite skill structures have been closely studied in past years 
leading to many data-intensive methods aimed at refining such 
structures. While many of these proposed methods have yielded 
success, defining and refining hierarchies of skill relationships are 
often difficult tasks.  The relationship between skills in a graph 
could either be causal, therefore, a prerequisite relationship (skill 
A must be learned before skill B). The relationship may be non-
causal, in which case the ordering of skills does not matter and 
may indicate that both skills are prerequisites of another skill. In 
this study, we propose a simple, effective method of determining 
the strength of pre-to-post-requisite skill relationships. We then 
compare our results with a teacher-level survey about the strength 
of the relationships of the observed skills and find that the survey 
results largely confirm our findings in the data-driven approach. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
• Mathematics of computing ? Regression analysis; • Applied 
computing ? Computer-assisted instruction; • Mathematics of 
computing ? Causal networks    

Keywords 
Prerequisite Structures, learning maps, skill relationships, 
refinements, PLACEments 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Prerequisite skill structures represent the ordering of skills in a 
given knowledge domain. The learning sequences represented in 
prerequisite skill structures have become an area of interest over 
the past few years. As a prelude to the objective of learning 
prerequisite skill structures from data, Tatsuoka [12] developed 
and proposed the Q-Matrix, a structure that represents the 
mapping of items on a test to specific skills. Others have built on 
this structure to find relationships between the skills and items 
represented in the Q-matrices [3,11] or proposed methods for 
refining Q-Matrices [7]. Brunskel presented preliminary work in 

which she used students’ noisy data to infer prerequisite structures 
[4]. Additionally, Scheines, et al. [11] present an extension of a 
causal structure discovery algorithm in which the assumption of 
pure items are relaxed to reflect real data, and use that relaxed 
assumption to infer prerequisite skill graphs from students’ 
response data.  

The focus of other researchers in the community has been on 
refining the prerequisite structures developed either by domain 
experts or through data mining approaches, as used by Barnes [3]. 
Cen, et al. [5] proposed Learning Factors Analysis (LFA) as a 
method for refining cognitive models. Their approach includes 
statistical techniques, human expertise, and combinatorial search 
to refine cognitive models. Following the proposals made by Cen 
et al. in [5], Adjei et al. [1] developed a combinatorial search 
algorithm based on LFA and found simplified prerequisite 
structures, which have equally good predictive power as the 
originals.  

Desmarais, et al. [6] introduced a method for determining partially 
ordered knowledge structures (POKS) from student data. The 
main idea behind this approach is to compare pairs of items in a 
test in order to determine any interactions existing between each 
pair. The interactions serve as a basis for determining the 
relationship between the skills represented by the items. Pavlik 
and his colleagues applied POKS to analyze item-type covariances 
and proposed a hierarchical agglomerative clustering method to 
refine the tagging of items to skills [9] and later proposed 
Learning Factors Transfer Analysis [10] as a means for generating 
domain models. Adjei and Heffernan [2] used randomized control 
experiments to identify links within prerequisite skill structures 
that require further scrutiny. All of this effort that has been 
expended in the quest to find skill structures from data have 
yielded varied degrees of success. 

The desire to find the best representation of skills (i.e., the 
prerequisite skill structure) is important for a number of reasons. It 
informs domain experts about the optimal sequencing of 
instruction in order to achieve the best tutoring for students. 
Additionally, this should help researchers in the education 
research community to better model students’ knowledge and 
performance in intelligent tutoring systems more accurately. Such 
strategies and models can benefit students’ understanding of new 
skills by supplying them with the optimal foundations for the 
material.  Likewise, better student models can lead to improved 
intervention design for those students requiring further aid. 

This current study proposes a simple method for identifying 
problematic links in a prerequisite skill structure, pointing domain 
experts to the ordering of instructions that may be creating 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.?  

LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom ?  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04…$15.00 ?  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883867 
 

mailto:Permissions@acm.org


problems for students. In this study we use linear regression of 
students’ performance on items presented to students in the order 
of a given prerequisite skill structure and make suggestions about 
the strength of the relationships between the skills.  

This paper starts out by describing PLACEments, the adaptive 
testing system from which data was collected for use in this study. 
This is followed by a description of the methods we employed and 
the results of the studies. We then present the results of a teacher 
survey that we conducted and compare the results of the survey 
with the findings of our data mining. The paper concludes with a 
discussion of the results and possible future work in this area. 

2. INTRODUCTION TO PLACEments 
PLACEments, a free mathematics adaptive testing system, is a 
feature of ASSISTments (a free web-based Intelligent Tutoring 
System (ITS)). When assigning a PLACEments test, an initial set 
of skills are selected for the test. Students are tested on the initial 
set of skills and depending on their performance, the system 
traverses a skill graph to present problems from the prerequisite 
skills of the initial set of skills. The test adapts to the student’s 
performance as well as the underlying prerequisite skill graph. If a 
student performs poorly on an item in the test, they are presented 
with items from the prerequisite skills required to solve the 
original problem. PLACEments uses a prerequisite skill structure 
created by one of the experts who developed the Common Core 
Standard for mathematics. Portions of this structure are currently 
being used by websites like AchieveTheCor.org 
[http://www.achievethecore.org/coherence-map/]. The developers 
of the site call it the Coherence Map. 

PLACEments has an additional feature that assigns remediation 
assignments to students who perform poorly on a test. These 
remediation assignments are intended to build the students’ 
understanding of the skills they performed poorly on, during the 
test. The remediation assignments are released in the order of the 
arrangement of skills in the prerequisite skill structure. Students 
are assigned lower grade level prerequisite skills first, and until 
they complete those remediation assignments, post-requisite skills-
related remediation assignments are not released. This ensures that 
the students gradually build on their knowledge of skills until they 
eventually reach a desired level of mastery of the skills in the 
given domain. 

To illustrate how PLACEments works, Figure 1 shows a 
hypothetical prerequisite skill graph where the letters A through H 
each represents a skill. The graph additionally shows a typical 
configuration of a student’s navigation through the prerequisite 
skill structure in the process of taking a PLACEments test. Skills 
A, B and C are the initial skills assigned on the test.  

 
Figure 1: A Typical Student’s navigation in PLACEments 

In this case the student performed poorly on skill A and so is 
asked questions for skills D and E. Since the student could not 
demonstrate understanding on skill E, he is further asked 
questions from skill H, which he performs poorly on as well. 

PLACEments creates remediation assignments for each of the 
skills the student performs poorly on (A, E and H). For this 
particular example, the remediation assignment for skill H is 
released before any other remediation assignments are released. 
The assignment for skill E is released after the student completes 
that previous skill’s assignment.  
For the purpose of this study, we focus only on the remediation 
assignment management feature. This is the feature that provides 
us with data for determining how strong prerequisite skill 
relationships are. The remediation assignments are typically 
assignments in which students practice a number of similarly 
designed problems to help them master a particular common core 
skill. In the course of the assignments, students are allowed to ask 
for help (in the form of hints) as they progressively answer the 
questions. The student is deemed to have mastered the skill if 
he/she correctly answers n consecutive problems in the assignment 
without asking for hints. The value of n typically ranges from 
three to five depending on the designer of the problem set. If after 
a set number of problems (typically called the daily limit), the 
student is unable to reach the mastery criterion, the system pauses 
the practice session until the next day when the student can 
continue with the assignment.   

3. METHODOLOGY 
3.1 Dataset 
The remediation assignment feature of PLACEments served as the 
source of data for the current study. The dataset includes students’ 
performance on remediation assignments. There were 495 
prerequisite skill links from the prerequisite skill structure 
described above. In this study we focused our attention only on 
skills that have exactly one prerequisite skill, but it is important to 
note that our approach is not inherently limited to such skills. Of 
the 104 skills that have exactly one prerequisite skill, we had 24 of 
the links that had data for a minimum of 50 students. For each of 
the prerequisite skill links examined, there was an average of 120 
students who were assigned remediation assignments of both the 
prerequisite and post-requisite skills of the link.  

Each row in the dataset has a student’s performance on the pre- 
and post-requisite skills (measured by the percent correct of the 
Skill Builder, and the number of items it took them to complete 
the Skill Builder typically referred to as the student’s mastery 
speeds) and the student's prior performance on all problems in 
ASSISTments. The latter is to help us account for the student’s 
knowledge level. The data set also includes the skill difficulty 
values for both the pre- and post-requisite skill. These difficulty 
values are the percent correct for all the items tagged with that 
skill in ASSISTments. Table 1 shows a sample of the dataset that 
was used for this study. Each row in the dataset represents a 
student's’ performance on the remediation assignments related to a 
given PLACEments test. If the student had a similar pair of 
assignments in another placements test, that information was 
ignored because we did not want to duplicate the data for a given 
student. In all, the dataset had 5803 instances of student’s 
performance on pre- and post-requisite skills, involving 1567 
students who have completed placements tests.  

3.2 Regression Models 
We ran linear regression to predict students’ performance on the 
post-requisite skill. To avoid bias caused by student performance 
and differences in skill difficulty, we included each student’s prior 



performance, mastery speed of the prerequisite skill, and the 
difficulty of both the pre- and post-requisite skills into our models. 
The dependent variable was the mastery speed of post-requisite 
skills. 

Table 1: Sample data set. 1 

SID PsSk Pre
Sk 

Pos
MS 

Pre
MS 

StPr  Pre 
Dif 

Pos 
Dif 

23412 57 50 4 5 0.75 0.32 0.40 

24321 87 50 3 5 0.86 0.58 0.67 

 
The following equation illustrates the regression model learned 
from the data for each of the links: 

………… (1) 
where i indicates the metric for the post-requisite skill and k 
indicates the prerequisite for student j.  The term m represents 
mastery speed,  represents the intercept, K represents the prior 
knowledge, and d represents skill difficulty. , ,  and  
represent the coefficients of the independent features in the 
regression.  

We considered a link’s model only when the model was found to 
be statistically significant (p<0.05) with R-Square above 0.1. All 
those models with R-Square values below 0.1 were considered to 
be suggestive of non-existence of a believable link between the 
two skills. For the models that met the above criterion, a 
prerequisite relationship was considered to exist when there is a 
positive standardized beta coefficient for the prerequisite skills 
mastery speed (i.e., > 0) and is significant (p<0.01 in many 
cases and p<0.05 in a few).  

Since outliers in the dataset could skew the results, we used two 
data transformation methods to minimize the effects of outliers in 
the dataset. The first method was to winsorize the mastery speeds 
in which all mastery speeds above 10 had their values set to 10. 
Skill Builders in ASSISTments have this feature where a daily 
limit of 10 is set to prevent students from banging their heads 
when they are unable to master the skill within 10 opportunities. 
This is the reason we chose 10 as the cut off number in order to 
fairly account for student performance. More than 80% of the data 
we used had mastery speeds below 10 so the impact of this 
transformation was not very significant. The second data 
transformation method we used was a log transform of the mastery 
speeds. We then used each of the transformations to predict the 
correspondingly transformed mastery speeds and present both 
results in the results section. 

                                                                 
1 The complete dataset can be found at 

http://tiny.cc/mslinkstrength. SID is the unique student 
identifier, PsSk is the post requisite skill id, PreSk has the 
prerequisite skill id, PrMS and PosMS contain the student’s 
mastery speed of the pre- and post-requisite skill respectively, 
StPr is the students’ prior percent correct (an indication of the 
student’ knowledge level), and PreDif and PosDiff is the 
difficulty of the pre- and post-requisite skills. The column names 
have been shortened for lack of space. 

In the case of the transformed data, we replaced the raw mastery 
speeds in the model with the transformed mastery speeds. We run 
linear regression models similar to equation (1) above with the 
mastery speeds,  and , respectively replaced with the 
transformed data,  and . Equation (1) in this case 
becomes: 

 ……….. (2) 

3.3 Teacher Survey 
To verify the results of our findings, we ran a survey of 45 
randomly selected domain experts and teachers who use 
ASSISTments and asked about their perceptions of the strength of 
the 24 prerequisite skill relationships, including the 14 links we 
studied in the regression study. A sample survey question is 
shown in Figure 3. The survey had 26 different questions, the first 
question introduced the survey and the last was complimentary. 
There was a survey question for each of the 24 prerequisite skill 
links. For each prerequisite skill link, we presented a sample 
problem for each of the post- and pre-requisite skills and asked 
teachers to rate, on a scale of 1 to 7 (1 not important; 7 extremely 
important), how important it is for a student to know the 
prerequisite skill to be able to answer the problem from the post-
requisite skill. Even though the questions give the impression that 
we are trying to figure out how related the skills are, we 
intentionally did not use the terms pre- and post-requisite skills in 
order not to confuse the respondents, or to point them in a 
particular direction. A link is considered to exist if the mean of the 
responses for that link was approximately 5 and a standard 
deviation of less 1 or less. We then compare the results of the 
survey with the findings of the study and report on the 
comparison.  

4. RESULTS 
4.1 Regression  
The results of the regression study are illustrated in Figure 2, 
which shows that several of the links could be found to be 
problematic and require further scrutiny. When the mastery speeds 
were transformed to take care of the outliers, the models do a 
better determination of the good links than was the case when the 
raw speeds were used. The takeaway from this graph is that we do 
a better job at finding both good and bad links in a prerequisite 
structure (and thus refine the structure) when we transform the 
mastery speeds. By transforming the data, we increase the good 
links by about 10 percentage points, as shown in Figure 2. 

  

Figure 2: Percentages of identified good and problematic links 
based on mastery speed transformation methods 

The graph in figure 4 shows that of the 24 prerequisite links, the 
regression method identified 25% of the links (6 links) in which 
the students’ performance on the prerequisite skills significantly 
predicts their performance on the post-requisite skills irrespective 
of the data transformation method used. 36% of the prerequisite 



skills (in 8 links) are significant predictors (p-value < 0.05) of the 
post-requisite skills if we used any two of the transformation 

methods. This suggests that a prerequisite skill relationship truly 
exists between the two skills in each of those links. 

 

 

Figure 3: Sample Teacher Survey question 

 

Figure 4: Agreement between mastery speed transformation 
methods 

4.2 Teacher Survey 
We received responses from 21 of the 45 teachers invited to 
respond to the survey, representing a response rate of 47%.  All 
respondents completed the survey in its entirety, and the resulting 
scores were averaged per link.  Those links found to have an 
average score greater than or equal to 5 with a standard deviation 
approximately equal to or less than 1 were viewed as exhibiting a 
prerequisite relationship. This is concluded as we used a 7-point 
scale, with those scores greater than 4 indicating at least some 
importance for one skill to be presented before the other.  On the 
basis of these criteria, the survey found 67% of the links (16 links) 
are good, while the remaining 33% (8 links) are bad. 

 

  
Figure 5: A comparison of model predictions with teacher 

survey about link strength. 
Using these values as ground truth, we compare the results to our 
regression models. In Figure 5, we observe our models in terms of 
precision, recall, and accuracy metrics against the ground truth 
values.  An interesting find of those results shows that the 

accuracy of the regression models was not influenced by the 
transformation method used.  This could indicate that the 
transformations alter the data in similar ways, or simply that there 
were too few instances affected by the transformations to view an 
effect. 

Figure 6 illustrates each method’s ability to identify correct links 
when compared to the ground truth values.  We see that the 
method is generally successful in identifying links.  This is the 
case, even as the accuracy seen in Figure 6 has room for 
improvement. 

 

Figure 6: Strength of Methodology. This graph shows counts 
of the good and bad links correctly identified by the method 

grouped by data transformation method. 

5. DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 
Prerequisite skill structures in any knowledge domain are very 
important for instruction and for preparing students for future 
learning. Almost every knowledge domain has one or a couple, 
which are created by domain experts. It is important to note that 
several of these prerequisite skill structures need to be refined. 
Data is currently being generated that affords us the opportunity 
to use data-centered methods to refine these structures. 

In this study we used data generated from PLACEments, which is 
an adaptive testing feature of ASSISTments, to propose one 
method for refining these structures. In this current study, we used 
a simple linear regression method in which we use the student 
performance on the prerequisite skill to predict their performance 
on the post-requisite skill. We found that for some of the links, 
this method was effective at identifying both good and bad links 
in the structure. Comparing the results of the method with the 
survey provided a ground truth with which to compare the 
findings from the study. The results have shown that if we have 



performance data, in the form of mastery speeds, we can achieve 
more accurate results by transforming the dataset in some format 
in order to take care of outliers that can easily ruin the findings. 
[8] The methodology affords prerequisite skill structure creators 
i.e., domain experts, the opportunity to identify and refine the 
order of the skills in these structures.  

It must however be noted though that the method was not perfect. 
A few of the links could not be correctly identified. Additionally, 
the criterion for determining whether a regression model is worth 
examining is relatively low. In view of these, further studies are 
required to ascertain the reasons behind that finding and to 
propose refinements of the method. There could be interaction 
effects and other relevant predictors that have been ignored, but 
which may be necessary to ensure better accuracy for the 
prediction models.  

6. CONTRIBUTION 
The main contribution of this study is the provision of a simple 
and effective linear regression based method for refining 
prerequisite skill structures. With this method, we are able to 
identify problematic arcs in the structure and make these findings 
available to domain experts who will then use this information to 
further refine the maps.  Additionally, we have introduced a 
system that provides us with a very good source of data for 
refining prerequisite skill structures. 

7. CONCLUSION 
Several authors in the educational data mining and learning 
analytics community have attempted to learn prerequisite 
structures from students’ response data. Others have looked for 
methods to refine already existing, domain-expert-made 
prerequisite skill structures using methods like LFA, etc. It has so 
far been difficult to get datasets that present students’ response 
data in the order of their underlying students’ performance. This 
paper uses such a dataset available from PLACEments, an 
adaptive testing system that traverses a prerequisite skill structure 
for item selection. The data from students’ performance on 
remediation assignments was used to learn the strength of 
prerequisite skill relationships existing between skills and to make 
suggestions regarding these arcs.  

We have shown that using simple linear regression and with the 
right dataset, we can relatively tell how strong the prerequisite 
skill relationship between two skills are and, based on that make 
suggestions, regarding which links domain experts may need to 
investigate and refine. 

This study does have some limitations. The data used for this 
analysis has come solely from PLACEments. There are not many 
such adaptive testing systems that generate the kind of data we 
used in this study. It will be interesting to study another dataset 
that is generated in the same or similar format as PLACEments, in 
order to apply this simple linear regression method to make 
statements about the strength of prerequisite skill relationships. 

We view this study as a preliminary step in our goal of finding 
optimal prerequisite structures using PLACEments data. 

8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
We thank multiple NSF grants (ACI-1440753, DRL-1252297, 
DRL-1109483, DRL-1316736, DGE-1535428 & DRL-1031398), 
the US Dept. of Ed (IES R305A120125 & R305C100024 and 
GAANN), and the ONR. 

9. REFERENCES 
[1] Adjei, S., Selent, D., Heffernan, N., Pardos, Z., Broaddus, 

A., & Kingston, N. (2014). Refining Learning Maps with 
Data Fitting Techniques: Searching for Better Fitting 
Learning Maps. In J. Stamper, Z. Pardos, M. Mavrikis, & B. 
M. McLaren (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on Educational Data Mining (pp. 413– 414). 
Accessed on October 31, 2015, from 
http://educationaldatamining.org/EDM2014/uploads/procs20
14/posters/89_EDM-2014-Poster.pdf   

[2] Adjei, S. A., Heffernan, N. T (2015) Improving Learning 
Maps Using an Adaptive Testing System: PLACEments. In 
Conati, C., Heffernan, N., Mitrovic, A., Verdejo, M.F. (Eds.) 
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference (pp. 517-
520), AIED 2015, Madrid, Spain, June 22-26, 2015.  

[3] Barnes T. (2005). The Q-matrix Method: Mining Student 
Response Data for Knowledge. In: Proceedings of AAAI 
2005 Educational Data Mining Workshop.  

[4] Brunskel, E. (2011). Estimating prerequisite structure from 
noisy data In Proceedings of International Conference on 
Educational Data Mining (EDM) 

[5] Cen, H., Koedinger, K. R., & Junker, B. (2005). Learning 
Factors Analysis: A general method for cognitive model 
evaluation and improvement. In M. Ikeda, K. Ashley, & T. 
Chan (Eds.), Intelligent Tutoring Systems 8th International 
Conference (pp. 164–175). Berlin: Springer. 

[6] Desmarais, M., Maluf, A., and Liu, J. (1996). User-expertise 
modeling with empirically derived probabilistic implication 
networks. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 5, 
283–315.  

[7] Desmarais, M.C., Xu, P. and Beheshti, B. (2015). A partition 
tree approach to combine techniques to refine item to skills 
Q-matrices 8th Conference on Educational Data Data 
Mining (EDM 2015), Madrid, Spain. 

[8] Osborne, Jason W. & Amy Overbay (2004). The power of 
outliers (and why researchers should always check for them). 
Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 9(6). 
Retrieved from http://PAREonline.net/getvn.asp?v=9&n=6 

[9] Pavlik Jr., P.I., Cen, H., Wu, L., Koedinger, K.R.: Using 
Item-type Performance Covariance to Improve the Skill 
Model of an Existing Tutor. In: Baker, R.S., Beck, J.E. 
(Eds.) Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on 
Educational Data Mining, 2008. Montreal, Canada, p. 77-86  

[10] Pavlik, P.I., Cen, H., Koedinger, K.R.: Learning factors 
transfer analysis: using learning curve analysis to 
automatically generate domain models. In: Barnes, T., 
Desmarais, M.C., Romero, C., Ventura, S. (eds.) 2nd 
International Conference on Educational Data Mining--
EDM2009, pp. 121-130, Cordoba, Spain, 1-3 July 2009 

[11] Scheines, R., Silver, E., Goldin, I.: Discovering prerequisite 
relationships among knowledge components. In: Stamper, J., 
Pardos, Z., Mavrikis, M., McLaren, B. (eds.) Proceedings of 
the 7th International Conference on Educational Data 
Mining. pp. 355–356. European Language Resources 
Association (ELRA), May 2014 

[12] Tatsuoka, K K. (1983). Rule space: An approach for dealing 
with misconceptions based on item response theory. Journal 
of Educational Measurement. 20(4) 345-354 


	1. INTRODUCTION
	2. INTRODUCTION TO PLACEments
	3. METHODOLOGY
	3.1 Dataset
	3.2 Regression Models
	3.3 Teacher Survey

	4. RESULTS
	4.1 Regression
	4.2 Teacher Survey

	5. DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
	6. CONTRIBUTION
	7. CONCLUSION
	8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
	9. REFERENCES


