
What Can We Learn from Facebook Activity? Using Social 
Learning Analytics to Observe New Media Literacy Skills 

 

June Ahn 
University of Maryland, College Park 

College of Information Studies and College of Education 
2117J Hornbake Building, South Wing, College Park, MD, USA 

juneahn@umd.edu 
  

ABSTRACT 
Social media platforms such as Facebook are now a ubiquitous 
part of everyday life for many people. New media scholars posit 
that the participatory culture encouraged by social media gives 
rise to new forms of literacy skills that are vital to learning. 
However, there have been few attempts to use analytics to 
understand the new media literacy skills that may be embedded in 
an individual’s participation in social media. In this paper, I 
collect raw activity data that was shared by an exploratory sample 
of Facebook users. I then utilize factor analysis and regression 
models to show how (a) Facebook members’ online activity 
coalesce into distinct categories of social media behavior and (b) 
how these participatory behaviors correlate with and predict 
measures of new media literacy skills. The study demonstrates the 
use of analytics to understand the literacies embedded in people’s 
social media activity. The implications speak to the potential of 
social learning analytics to identify and predict new media literacy 
skills from data streams in social media platforms. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.2 [Computer and Information Science Education]: 
Literacy 

General Terms 
Measurement, Human Factors. 

Keywords 
Learning Analytics, Social Learning Analytics, Social Media, 
Literacy, New Media Literacy. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Some of the most popular websites in the world are social 
networking applications such as Facebook, video sharing sites 
such as Youtube, and massive, user-generated resources such as 
Wikipedia. Online applications are increasingly ubiquitous, social, 
and participatory [19, 29]. Against this backdrop, educators and 
policymakers agree that individuals must develop so-called “21st 
century skills” which include critical thinking, collaboration, 

communication, and information literacy [13, 26]. The concept of 
21st century skills is not new, but the nature of these skills is 
profoundly different in media-rich environments. For example, 
collaboration is an enduring human skill, but individuals must 
now be able to collaborate in environments that are mediated by 
technology, across distances, with mass numbers of users, and 
with easy access to information. 

Literacy scholars also contribute to this dialogue by elaborating 
particular skills that are important when individuals interact with 
new media. For example, Jenkins [19] observes that the rise of 
online communities such as Facebook facilitates a participatory 
culture where individuals must develop literacies such as 
networking, information appropriation, remix, judgment, and 
collective intelligence. As individuals leave traces of their online 
behavior in platforms such as social network sites, there are ripe 
opportunities to examine whether these behaviors can be utilized 
as indicators of such literacies. The emerging field of learning 
analytics offers strategies to assess and examine the development 
of new media literacy skills in naturalistic, online environments 
[12]. 

Learning analytics describes different ways of collecting and 
analyzing data about learner interactions within their contexts, 
with the goal of understanding and optimizing learning 
environments [5]. One particular opportunity is to leverage the 
data individuals produce via their participation in social media 
communities. Buckingham Shum & Ferguson [8] identify this 
opportunity as social learning analytics, which focuses on 
combining sociocultural frameworks of learning with analytics to 
understand people’s learning processes and dispositions. This 
study demonstrates this idea by utilizing traces of participatory 
behavior that individuals enact in a popular social media platform 
(Facebook) to directly analyze, measure, and predict new media 
literacy skills. 

In the following paper, I demonstrate the use of social media data, 
culled from the popular social network site (SNS) Facebook, to 
observe new media literacy skills.  First, the paper integrates ideas 
about social media, sociocultural learning, and social learning 
analytics. Second, I argue for the utility of using publicly 
available social data from popular platforms to assess literacy 
skills. Third, the paper outlines an approach that utilizes 
Facebook’s application programming interface (API) to collect 
individuals’ activity data. In this study, I consider two exploratory 
questions: 

1. Do Facebook interactions cluster into conceptually distinct 
behaviors? 

2. And do these behaviors correlate with and predict new media 
literacy skills? 

 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
LAK’13, April 8–12, 2013, Leuven, Belgium. 
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04…$15.00. 

135



I report two analyses from this data: (1) an exploratory factor 
analysis to examine how raw activity data may group into broader 
categories of behavior, and (2) regression models that explore 
whether these behaviors predict new media literacy skills. The 
analyses present exploratory evidence towards the validity of 
analyzing raw activity data from social media platforms, as 
indicators of different literacy skills. Such indicators could be 
used in a variety of ways such as to make learners cognizant of 
the new media literacy skills they develop through their everyday 
online activities or validate the presence and importance of 21st 
century literacies as measurable outcomes for learners. The 
following study is exploratory in nature, but offers implications 
for the use of publicly available social data streams to assess and 
predict literacy skills in situ, from an individual’s natural 
participation in online communities. 

2. SOCIAL MEDIA, LITERACY SKILLS, 
AND SOCIAL LEARNING ANALYTICS 
Educators are increasingly interested in the use of social media for 
learning. Scholars argue that platforms such as Facebook or 
Twitter allow individuals to practice new skills and ways to 
engage with learning processes [15, 16, 17]. A natural link 
between social technologies and learning is the development of 
new media literacy skills. Jenkins [19] observes that individuals 
now participate in online communities and engage with new 
technologies that encourage media creation and sharing. Today’s 
learner does not merely read or consume content. They create 
information in a myriad of media channels and formats, such as 
status updates on Facebook, tweets on the Twitter platform, 
videos on Youtube, or personal blog posts. These affordances 
create a participatory culture where creating, sharing, and 
collaborating in online networks become vital skills for learning. 
Jenkins suggests that the following literacy skills are vital when 
working in new media environments: 

• Play – capacity to problem solve, tinker, and experiment 
with one’s surroundings 

• Performance – ability to adopt different identities to explore 
and learn 

• Simulation – ability to construct and interpret models to 
explore real-world phenomena 

• Appropriation – understanding of how to sample and remix 
other sources in one’s own work 

• Multitasking – capability to shift attention as needed 

• Distributed Cognition – skills to effectively use information 
and tools to expand one’s mental capacity 

• Collective Intelligence – ability to collaborate and pool 
knowledge effectively 

• Judgment – skills to evaluate information sources as 
credible and reliable 

• Transmedia Navigation – use of multiple means and 
platforms to follow information streams 

• Networking – ability to search for, synthesize, and share 
information through online networks 

• Negotiation – ability to participate in and adapt to different 
communities 

These examples highlight how literacy skills are uniquely tied to 
our current environment and technological tools. For example, 
networking is an enduring skill that exists in a variety of contexts. 
One can network in a face-to-face setting and one can also 
network in an SNS such as Facebook. The skills required in either 
setting differ in many ways. New media literacies, and the related 
concept of 21st century skills, describe abilities and practices that 
are intimately tied to the opportunities afforded by new 
technologies. 

Sociocultural theories of learning help to frame how learning is 
comprised of social interaction that occurs in situated settings. A 
sociocultural perspective recognizes that learning is defined 
through interaction with others, with tools available to the learner, 
and within specific institutional and cultural constraints [20, 22]. 
To illustrate, one can ask the question, “How do I know if a 
person has learned or developed expertise in appropriation skills?” 
The evidence to answer this question is entirely dependent on the 
situated context one considers. For example, the proper practice of 
citing prior research in an academic paper consists of particular 
skills, cultural expectations from different communities of 
scholars, and institutional norms such as publication venues and a 
plethora of other drivers. Learning appropriation skills in this 
context is uniquely tied to these complex social interactions, 
cultural contexts, and institutions within which academic writers 
work. 

With new media tools, the skill of appropriation takes on entirely 
new meanings. Memes that emerge and spread via Internet forums 
are a common example of new definitions of appropriation. 
Shirky [27] documents one such phenomenon, “lolcats”, which 
feature images of cats with humorous or poignant captions. These 
images are often shared, voted on and spread, via online social 
forums. The creators of these images combine, or remix, already 
existing images and words, to create combinations that exhibit 
new forms of thought, humor, or social commentary. Learning 
how to be a good remixer requires different appropriation skills – 
technical cultural, and institutional – than the appropriation 
practices seen in formal academic work [3]. 

Sociocultural theories also recognize that artifacts, technology, 
and tools mediate learning [20]. The use of language and the tools 
available in a given environment are examples of how artifacts 
mediate the way we learn. For example, within primary and 
secondary science education classrooms, scholars observe that 
cultural norms of communication styles define whether and how 
one can observe learning happening [4, 22, 24]. A young person 
learns science in particular ways in a formal classroom and in 
other ways via everyday life activities [10, 11]. 

Similarly, recent studies of youths and social media highlight how 
the technological language of new media environments also shape 
learning. For example, Jenkins [19] identifies performance as an 
important literacy skill. A “good” performance can be defined in 
various ways depending on a situation such as acting in a stage 
play, giving a speech, or participating in a classroom discussion. 
Young people also readily adopt the technological tools available 
to them, such as social network sites, to develop their everyday 
performance skills. Researchers have found that adolescents will 
actively configure their SNS profiles to “perform” their identities 
– friends, interests, hobbies, and personalities etc. – in these 
online communities [6, 16].  

A sociocultural framework suggests that different environments 
may afford very distinct behaviors and literacy skills. This 
understanding leads to natural questions of what specific literacies 

136



might develop from using different social media platforms such as 
Facebook. Observing and measuring these literacy skills has 
traditionally been limited to qualitative observation. New media 
literacy skills are difficult to quantitatively measure, predict, or 
assess because they are often processes, or interactions that are 
cumbersome to observe via traditional methods such as surveys 
[28]. Learning analytics may aid in observing indicators of 
literacy skills in natural settings. 

2.1 A social learning analytics approach to 
understand new media literacy 
In the nascent literature of learning analytics, a few scholars have 
forwarded the idea of understanding social learning in online 
communities through analytics. For example, Buckingham Schum 
& Ferguson [8] define the term social learning analytics to 
delineate strategies to measure and “render visible, and in some 
cases potentially actionable, behaviours and patterns in the 
learning environment that signify effective process” [sic]. In 
addition, Dawson [12] observes that researchers are now able to 
use big data culled from online communities to measure and track 
new literacy skills. These ideas arise from the fact that users’ 
actions are now readily tracked and recorded in online platforms, 
providing a direct view into some learning behaviors. 

These authors highlight how online social platforms allow 
researchers to utilize different analysis strategies to understand 
social learning. For example, one could use social network 
analysis to ascertain an individual’s position in a network of 
learners or network of interactions [8, 12]. Network position then 
serves as a measure of influence (e.g. a person is more central in a 
learning network) or perhaps collaboration (e.g. a person is 
connected with diverse others). In addition, researchers could 
utilize strategies such as analyzing discourse patterns in online 
conversation or content analysis of user-generated media [8]. 

Social media sites, such as Facebook, collect detailed interaction 
data. These platforms might collect user activity such as how 
many messages are posted, updates shared, photos uploaded and 
other user behaviors. If one takes a sociocultural learning 
perspective, that these actions themselves define potential literacy 
behaviors, then there is opportunity to better understand whether 
social media activities could serve as general indicators of 
underlying new media literacies. Traditional measurement tools, 
such as surveys, might instead give way to natural observation 
from digital traces left by individuals in their everyday online 
activity. In this study, I consider this opportunity by exploring 
whether publicly shared Facebook activity data can be used to 
measure and predict new media literacy skills. 

2.2 Research questions 
Individuals participate in a variety of activities within social 
network sites such as Facebook. Members of these communities 
can create their own profiles, add and delete friends to their 
networks, and browse the profiles of friends in their network [7]. 
In addition, users can write email messages, leave short wall posts 
on friends’ pages, broadcast status updates, create groups, share 
links, upload media such as photos and videos, and spread 
information by sharing posts from one’s friends. A growing 
literature has documented how these affordances are used to 
create diverse examples of participatory culture such as college 
students using the platform to create campus groups, teenagers 
learning media skills, or individuals developing social capital [1, 
2, 9, 14, 16, 21]. 

However, it is unclear whether raw Facebook activity might 
reflect specific behaviors that can be linked to new media 
literacies. Thus, the first research question in this study explores 
whether Facebook activity (e.g. messages sent, status updates, 
photos shared etc.) coalesce in ways that suggest broader 
categories of behavior: 

R1: Do Facebook interactions cluster into conceptually 
distinct behaviors? 

The first research question is exploratory and asks whether 
Facebook activity can be categorized into higher-order categories 
of behavior. The second research question then examines whether 
Facebook activity is significantly correlated to measures of new 
media literacy. 

R2: Do these behaviors (in Facebook) correlate with and 
predict new media literacy skills? 

In this analysis, I apply Jenkins’ [19] framework of new media 
literacy skills: Play, Performance, Simulation, Appropriation, 
Multitasking, Distributed Cognition, Collective Intelligence, 
Judgment, Transmedia Navigation, Networking, and Negotiation. 

3. METHODOLOGY 
Data for this analysis was collected via a custom Facebook 
application that was developed for this project. A website was 
developed that presented participants with a clear consent form 
detailing all research activities. Once participants gave consent 
they were presented with an online survey. The survey collected 
basic demographic data in addition to measures of new media 
literacies and general technology literacy (described below). Once 
participants completed the survey they were invited to login to 
their Facebook accounts and share their public social network data 
for this study. I utilized the publicly available Facebook API to 
connect the research website, online survey, and participants’ 
Facebook accounts. The API allows developers to access 
particular data fields that represent the users’ interactions on the 
Facebook platform. 

Facebook policies for data use require that any application that 
utilizes user data must request clear and explicit permissions.  
When a participant connected their Facebook account, they were 
presented with a standard Facebook screen that listed all potential 
permissions for data sharing. The participant was able to decline 
or opt out at any time in this process. Thus, all participants in this 
study went through two explicit phases of consent. They were 
given all research information at the outset and gave their consent 
to take the online survey. They then went through a second 
opportunity for consent when sharing their Facebook data for the 
research project. There were 189 participants who took the online 
survey, and 99 then connected their Facebook data in the second 
phase. 

The participants in this study clearly took part in both consent 
phases and took full advantage of opportunities to opt out at any 
moment, as nearly 50% of participants opted out of Facebook 
sharing. I employed this strategy of multiple consent processes 
because the ethics of data in social media platforms is a vital 
consideration that remains an unexplored issue in current 
research. The data collection experience reported here provides a 
demonstration for researchers who might leverage social media 
data in future studies. This type of data collection should require 
explicit consent at every phase and researchers can expect 
substantial opt-out rates. Finally, researchers could also plan to 
develop web applications that benefit the user in addition to 
serving as a data collection mechanism, as a way to improve both 

137



the participant experience and participation rate. These are among 
the best practices recommended by Facebook for application 
developers, and are highly salient for researchers as well. 

Participants were recruited through email, announcements via the 
author’s Twitter and Facebook network, personal contacts and 
flyers distributed on a college campus in the eastern United States. 
As noted earlier, 189 participants completed the online survey 
with 99 who also provided additional consent and shared their 
Facebook data for the study. I note from the outset that this is a 
convenience sample and the design of the present study is 
exploratory in nature. However, this exploratory study is the first 
from the author’s knowledge, to quantitatively examine new 
media literacy skills using a novel approach of data collection 
from participants’ Facebook activity. 

3.1 Measures and variables 
I employed another safeguard for participants in the data 
collection by only collecting aggregate measures of Facebook 
activity, and not gathering any personally identifiable information. 
For example, the data used in this analysis considered aggregate 
measures such as the total number of friends a user had in their 
network, but I did not collect the actual usernames or IDs of these 
friends. This detail is important because it shapes analytic 
strategies. User privacy remains generally intact in this data 
collection, but methods such as social network analysis are not 
possible since exact ties to particular friends are not collected. 

These ethical decisions also require researchers and analysts to be 
critical about what insight is gained or lost from a particular data 
collection strategy. In this study, I explore whether different 
Facebook activities group together into broader categories of 
behavior (see findings below). This analytic strategy of discerning 
fewer, broader variables can be potentially useful for data streams 
culled from popular social media platforms where the number of 
variables can be large. However, this decision necessarily 
abstracts behavior at a higher-level and blurs our understanding of 
more detailed cultural practices. For example, the variable – Links 
(see below) – can serve as a relatively clear proxy for members 
sharing information through hyperlinks. However, without direct 
observation of what the hyperlinks refer to, one cannot analyze 
the diverse cultural practices that might emerge from the same 
function of sharing links. I note these tensions at the outset. 

When a participant connected their Facebook account, the 
application collected an aggregate record of the user’s activity 
over the previous 30 days. The variables collected for each 
participant included: 
• Emails received – number of emails received on Facebook 
• Emails sent – number of emails sent by the user on 

Facebook 
• Friends - number of friends in the user’s network 
• Friend Lists – Facebook users can organize their friends into 

lists (close friends, coworkers etc.).  This variable is the 
number of lists created. 

• Links – number of hyperlinks shared by the user with his or 
her network 

• Member Pages – number of Facebook pages a user had 
joined 

• Networks – number of networks a user joined (e.g. 
geographic network, a college network etc.) 

• Notes – number of blog posts a user wrote 

• Photos – number of photos posted 
• Status Messages – number of status messages posted by the 

user 
• Videos – number of videos posted by the user 
• Wallposts – number of wall posts received by the user from 

their network 
The Facebook application for this study only collected this data at 
a single time point (Spring 2011) and ceased any data collection 
after a participant completed the study. The variables were chosen 
based on a combination of decision points: whether the specific 
data was directly available via the Facebook API at the time of 
development (with no need to parse user’s news feeds) and 
indicators that might signify active behaviors such as sending 
messages or joining groups (versus news items that appear on a 
member’s news feed, but would be unclear whether the member 
actually read the item or not). 
The participants completed a survey that sought to measure the 
new media literacy skills outlined by Jenkins [19] using 5-point 
likert scale question (see [23] for more details of the new media 
literacy scales). To illustrate a typical scale, the networking scale 

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics 

Variable Mean (St. Dev.) or 
Percentage 

Gender (Female) 68.69% 
Age 26.42 (7.99) 
New Media Literacy Scales  

Negotiation 10.65 (3.03) 
Networking 14.61 (3.27) 
Judgment 15.67 (2.58) 
Play 11.58 (2.52) 
Multitasking 9.85 (3.21) 
Remixing 8.71 (2.76) 

Transmedia 
Navigation 

4.67 (1.85) 

Technology Literacy Scale 58.65 (14.25) 
Facebook Data  

Emails Received 60.36 (90.74) 
Emails Written 64.31 (134.02) 
Friends 444.64 (381.62) 
Friend Lists 3.35 (4.41) 
Links 5.04 (8.35) 
Member Pages 169.24 (501.37) 
Networks 0.87 (0.93) 
Notes 0.21 (0.95) 
Photos 17.98 (42.84) 
Status Messages 13.69 (20.73) 
Videos 0.19 (0.77) 
Wall Posts 22.53 (12.38) 

N = 99 

 

138



consisted of 5 statements where participants answered with their 
agreement level: 

• I like to share my favorite links or creative work on social 
media sites like Facebook or YouTube or Twitter. 

• I often share links on Facebook, Twitter, my blog, etc. 
• I am happy that I can interact online or on Facebook with 

people from all over the world. 
• I like the fact that I can see all my friends on my Facebook 

profile. 
• When I go online, I like to feel like I am part of a 

community. 

Similar scales asked participants about their propensity to engage 
with the other literacy behaviors. In this study, I collected survey 
scales for 7 new media literacies that had well-developed question 
items (see [23]): negotiation, networking, judgment, play, 
multitasking, remixing, and transmedia navigation. 

In addition to the literacy scales, I collected several control 
variables for the analysis. For demographic variables, participants 
reported their gender and age. In addition, I collected a general 
scale of technology literacy developed by Hargittai & Hsieh [18] 
that asks participants about their general level of comfort with 
common technology terms such as weblog, pdf, spyware, wiki and 
other items. Descriptive statistics are provided in Table 1. 

4. ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
In the following, I present two related analyses to address the 
research questions posed in this study. First, an exploratory factor 
analysis was used to explore whether Facebook activity data 
grouped into distinct participatory behaviors. Second, I used the 
factors that arose from this analysis in regression models to 
examine whether behaviors found in the Facebook environment 
correlated with survey measures of new media literacies. 

4.1 Exploratory factor analysis 
Before factor analysis, I conducted descriptive exploration of the 
Facebook variables. As is often the case with data culled from 
online communities, almost all of the variables followed a power 

law distribution except the variable, networks. For example, the 
majority of members in this sample sent and received a few 
emails with others in the Facebook platform. However, there were 
a few individual users who exchanged increasing amounts of 
emails, creating a long tail distribution. Due to these non-normal 
distributions, I transformed the variables using the natural log. 
I utilized the data shared by Facebook participants in a principal 
components analysis to explore whether these online activities 
coalesced into distinct factors. Varimax rotation was applied to 
identify distinct, independent factors that were orthogonal to one 
another. Four factors were identified that had eigenvalues above 
1.0. These four factors explained approximately 71% of the 
variance among variables. The first factor accounted for 34% of 
the variance, the second factor accounted for 17%, the third factor 
for 12%, and the fourth factor accounted for 8%. 

Table 2 reports the factor loadings of the variables. The first factor 
included Facebook activity such as emailing, writing status 
messages, and receiving wall posts on one’s profile page. These 
variables represent different messaging behaviors in the Facebook 
platform. The second factor included Facebook activity such as 
writing status messages, sharing links, sharing photos, managing 
networks by creating friend lists, and joining member pages. The 
interactions suggest different ways that Facebook members 
manage their information sharing behaviors. The online 
community is a place for individuals to share personal 
information, links to other sources, and media such as photos. In 
addition, individuals are increasingly using features such as friend 
lists to manage what they share and with whom. For example, 
creating a friend list of coworkers and another list of personal 
friends requires an explicit thought process that one will share 
particular information with one group and not the other. 

One interesting result was the overlap of status messages with 
both messaging and information sharing. This finding lends face 
validity to the analysis, as status messages are often used in 
diverse ways. Most of the variables in the messaging factor refer 
to direct communication where an individual directly writes to 
another via a Facebook email or on their wall. Most of the 
variables in the information sharing factor refer to updates or 

Table 2: Factor Loadings of Facebook Activity 

 Factor 1: Messaging Factor 2: Info. Sharing Factor 3: Friending Factor 4: Affiliating 

Emails Received 0.91    
Emails Written 0.91    
Wall Posts 0.55    
Status Messages 0.63 0.53   
Friend Lists  0.63   
Links  0.65   
Member Pages  0.55   
Photos  0.71   
Friends   0.83  
Notes   -0.83  
Videos   -0.52  
Networks    0.92 

Factor loadings < 0.50 suppressed, N = 99 

 

139



media that Facebook members share broadly. Status messages 
appear to be a part of both distinct behaviors. 

The third factor identified in this analysis was friending behavior. 
The main variable in this factor was the size of one’s friend 
network. Having more friends on Facebook means an explicit 
practice of accepting friend requests and seeking out more 
connections. Interestingly, this factor had some substantial 
negative loadings for writing notes (e.g. Facebook’s version of 
blog posts) and sharing videos. Writing notes and creating videos 
might be examples of inward, individual-focused behaviors, 
which is different than outward, networking-focused behavior 
such as accumulating larger networks. The fourth factor was 
largely made up of one major variable, networks, which denote 
how many groups with which a person affiliated. In Facebook one 
can join networks such as an alumni group, a regional group (e.g. 
I am a part of the New York City network), and other group 
identifications. This feature may represent affiliating or group 
identity behaviors in the Facebook platform. 

The exploratory factor analysis suggests that Facebook data from 
this sample of participants can form higher-order categories of 
participatory behavior. In this sample, the behaviors that appear to 
be represented also align with the major features and activities one 
would undertake in a social networking platform: messaging 
others, sharing media and information, linking with friends, and 
affiliating with networks. Using the results of this factor analysis, 
I then created four composite variables that represent these 
behaviors, to use in the subsequent analysis. 

4.2 Regression analysis 
The second research question asks whether the participatory 
behaviors observed in the Facebook platform might also reflect or 
correlate with measures of new media literacy skills. To examine 
this question, I conducted an ordinary least squares (OLS) 
regression analysis. The regression model examined the survey 
measures of new media literacy skills as the dependent variable. I 
examine seven literacy skills: negotiation, networking, judgment, 
play, multitasking, appropriation, and transmedia navigation [19]. 
The independent variables in the regression model included the 
four factor variables – messaging, information sharing, friending, 
and affiliating – in addition to three control variables (technology 

literacy, gender, and age). The resulting linear model is: 

y = ?1messaging + ?2information sharing +?3friending + 
?4affiliating + ?5tech-literacy + ?6gender + ?7age + ? 

The results of the regression analyses are presented in Table 3. I 
do not display the demographic variables in the table, but report 
the instances where these variables were statistically significant 
predictors of particular new media literacies to aid in the 
interpretation. 

An overarching finding from this analysis is that particular 
Facebook behaviors uncannily relate to new media literacy skills 
in ways that are ecologically valid. Popular discussions of the 
impact of social media for learning generally suggest that these 
online communities help develop literacy skills. The results 
presented in Table 3 contribute empirical evidence of these claims 
and also illuminate with more specificity, what types of activities 
in the platform relate to what particular media literacy skills. The 
results suggest that Facebook activity is particularly salient for the 
literacy skills of negotiation, networking, appropriation, and 
transmedia navigation. 

Negotiation. As noted earlier, the literacy of negotiation describes 
the ability for individuals to participate in and adapt to diverse 
communities of others. The results of this study suggest that 
messaging behaviors in Facebook are highly related to an 
individual’s negotiation literacy (Table 3). A standard deviation 
increase in Facebook messaging behaviors was related to a 0.67 
standard deviation increase in the negotiation scale. Interestingly, 
the other Facebook behaviors (information sharing, friending, and 
affiliating) were not statistically significant. These results begin to 
make sense however, when considering what these behaviors 
actually mean in the situated context of Facebook. Sharing media 
is largely about information dissemination, not about negotiating 
different community norms. Friending others in Facebook is about 
growing the size of one’s network, but does not necessarily mean 
active interaction. Affiliating with networks in Facebook is a 
largely passive activity; the user does this affiliation once and 
rarely engages with this affiliation explicitly in their daily 
Facebook use. It seems that active communication behaviors are 
related to an individual’s opportunity to negotiate diverse 
relationships with others. 

Table 3: Regression Analysis Predicting New Media Literacies 

 Negotiation Networking Judgment Play Multitasking Appropriation Transmedia 
Navigation 

Messaging 0.67 ** 0.60 * 0.31 0.19 -0.01 0.48 0.30 
Information Sharing 0.20 1.39 ** -0.002 -0.10 0.36 0.55 * 0.32 * 
Friending -0.34 0.48 -0.32 -0.18 -0.52 0.21 0.32 
Affiliating 0.33 0.77 ** -0.09 0.14 0.34 -0.06 -0.01 
Control Variables1        

Technology 
Literacy 

0.06 ** 0.01 0.09 ** 0.08 ** 0.04 0.01 0.02 

        
Adjusted R2 0.09 0.23 0.17 0.31 0.01 0.04 0.08 
N 94 95 94 93 95 93 95 

Standardized coefficients 
(1) Control variables gender and age not displayed in the table, but included in the model. 
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10 

 

140



Networking. Not surprisingly, the participatory behaviors seen in 
Facebook are most predictive of networking literacy (Table 3). 
These results confirm intuitive notions of social networking sites, 
that they are designed for networking, and also confirm the 
conceptual model proposed in this study. The findings offer 
indicators of validity that the exploratory factor analysis identified 
participatory behaviors that are highly salient and related to a 
survey measure of networking literacy. The results in Table 3 
show that messaging, information sharing, and affiliating 
behaviors were all highly related to networking literacy. Also 
interesting to note, was that information sharing behaviors had an 
extremely large relationship to a person’s networking score. In the 
context of Facebook, this finding again makes perfect sense. 
Individuals who share more information in the platform, create 
more opportunities to actively interact and glean the benefits of 
networking behavior. Conversely, merely adding friends to one’s 
network (and not necessarily sharing with them) was not 
significantly related to networking literacy. 

Appropriation. The skill of appropriation describes the ability to 
take previous ideas and artifacts, to create one’s own work. In the 
context of new media, practices of remix (e.g. appropriating 
digital media to create new projects) are an example of 
appropriation skills. The results in Table 3 show that information 
sharing behaviors in Facebook are highly correlated to 
appropriation literacy. Facebook members who share more media 
and information in their Facebook activity are likely to have more 
opportunities to practice appropriation skills. In fact, the very act 
of sharing itself could be interpreted as an act of appropriation, 
since one is actively using other information sources to present to 
others. An example of appropriation situated in Facebook is 
sharing of links to other media sources or creating and sharing 
one’s own photos with the network. 

Transmedia Navigation. Transmedia navigation is the ability to 
follow information across multiple platforms and pathways. For 
example, fans of the popular television series LOST also often 
participated in online forums, played reality-based games 
connected to the plot of the show, and discussed actual scientific 
knowledge to explain elements of the series. In current media 
environments, individuals can follow ideas through multiple 
platforms such as television, online communities, books, 
magazines, mobile applications and other means. The results in 
Table 3 show that information sharing behaviors in Facebook 
were highly correlated with transmedia navigation. The social 
network site itself is designed for individuals to share media, and 
thus could act as a connector for transmedia behaviors. Facebook 
members who share more information are also more likely to 
navigate this information by following links, or bringing other 
media sources into the online community. 

What Didn’t Facebook Activity Predict? The Facebook 
behaviors identified here were not significant predictors of three 
new media skills: judgment, play, and multitasking. A deeper 
interpretation of these findings also lends face validity to these 
results. Judgment is the ability to evaluate information sources as 
credible and reliable. There is nothing inherent about sending 
messages to others, sharing media, adding friends, or affiliating 
with networks that might lead a person to feel more capable to 
effectively evaluate credibility of information sources. The only 
statistically significant predictor of judgment in this model was a 
general measure of technology literacy. This result suggests that 
perhaps a broader experience with diverse media types is more 
likely to help one be a better evaluator of credibility, than only 
interacting in Facebook. 

Play is the ability to problem-solve, tinker, and experiment with 
artifacts and objects. None of the social interactions in Facebook 
were significantly correlated with play literacy, and this finding 
makes intuitive sense as well. There is little designed into 
Facebook that require individuals to tinker or experiment in ways 
that other activities might allow (e.g. programming a computer or 
building a model). General technology literacy was correlated 
with a person’s propensity to play. Interestingly, gender was 
highly correlated with the play scale. Males in this sample were 
substantially more likely to report tinkering, problem solving, and 
experimenting with objects than the female participants. 

Finally, the ability to multitask was not significantly predicted by 
Facebook activity or general technology literacy. The only main 
predictor of multitasking literacy was age, with older individuals 
scoring lower on the multitasking scale compared to younger 
individuals. This finding mirrors popular thought, which suggests 
that younger generations are more comfortable with multitasking 
in new media environments [25]. 

5. DISCUSSION 
This study makes several contributions to learning analytics, 
social media and learning research. First, the study demonstrates 
ways to utilize social data from the popular social media platform 
Facebook, to explore the new media literacy skills embedded in 
people’s everyday online networking behaviors. Applying 
analytics to this social interaction data, I show how Facebook 
behaviors group into distinct participatory behaviors: messaging, 
information sharing, friending, and affiliating. In addition, this 
study illuminates how Facebook activity correlates and predicts 
particular new media literacy skills. Social media platforms 
represent a ripe arena to examine the social learning behaviors and 
sociocultural learning processes embedded in people’s everyday 
activities. Social learning analytics provide a methodological lens 
to make meaning from these massive data streams. 
Second, this study contributes empirical evidence of the literacy 
skills that are involved in one’s Facebook participation. The 
results introduce additional clarity to the broader discussions 
about social media and learning. Moving beyond general claims 
that people’s participation in social media are related to new 
media literacies, the use of analytics on this Facebook data begins 
to clarify what particular activities in these online communities 
relate to which specific literacy skills. Facebook behaviors appear 
to be most related to networking, negotiation, appropriation, and 
transmedia navigation. However, literacies such as play, 
judgement, and multitasking where not related to Facebook 
behavior. Such findings lend more detail to scholarly discussions 
about which media tools may promote which specific literacy 
skills.  

Furthermore, the findings illuminate new questions such as what 
other types of media-based activities might lend themselves to the 
literacies not represented in Facebook behavior? For example, 
Facebook’s design enables certain types of participatory behavior: 
messaging, information sharing, friending, and affiliation. Future 
work might consider whether other major social media platforms 
such as Twitter, Tumblr, Pinterest, Instagram, and others, enable 
diverse modes of behavior. Future work might also consider 
whether particular tools used to access these platforms also 
engender diverse practices and literacies. For example, one can 
interact with Twitter via the web-browser interface, Twitter 
clients on the iPhone and Android devices, or desktop clients such 
as Tweetdeck. Behaviors may differ with various tools, even 
within the same social media community. Social media platforms 

141



tap into different human needs to connect and share with one 
another, and future work might consider whether different 
platforms are related to particular literacy skills. 

Third, this study contributes to the emerging vision for social 
learning analytics. Researchers can now collect large streams of 
social interaction data, which directly reflect on learning 
dispositions that are difficult to assess via traditional instruments 
such as surveys. The implication of this technological capability is 
that researchers who utilize a sociocultural perspective on learning 
can actively observe, quantify, and test hypotheses about social 
learning processes and soft-skills in ways not possible before. For 
example, the exploratory study presented here begins to show how 
common, everyday platforms such as Facebook can show the 
emerging literacy skills that people develop in new media 
environments. Learning analytics of social data add to the 
repertoire of research strategies to understand learning in online 
platforms. 
Finally, the results of this study offer potential design implications 
from social learning analytics. If researchers identify measures of 
literacy skills that are directly reflected in people’s everyday 
social media participation, there is great potential to design 
dashboards and visualizations that can help individuals understand 
the learning benefits they accrue from this online activity. 
Already, for-profit services such as Klout are creating dashboards 
that attempt to calculate one’s level of “influence” in their online 
social networks. A similar potential exists for educators to value, 
and make visible to learners, the literacy behaviors that are being 
developed in popular social media platforms. The idea to leverage 
popular platforms such as Facebook to help learners understand 
their own literacy development is potentially a powerful and 
exciting idea where learning analytics plays a central role. 

5.1 Limitations 
There are several limitations to note when interpreting the present 
study. First, the analyses presented here are clearly exploratory in 
nature. I utilized a convenience sample and the participant pool 
was relatively small, as 99 participants opted to share their 
Facebook data. Any interpretations are bounded by this sample 
only and not generalizable to the broader Facebook population. 
Despite these boundaries, the present study is among the first to 
utilize analytics on data collected directly from the Facebook 
platform, to assess new media literacy skills. Future work that 
might gain broader access to members of the platform will be 
helpful to validate and refine the analyses performed here. 

Second, as noted in the methodology section, I made explicit data 
collection choices to protect the privacy of participants. Only 
aggregate numbers of user activity were collected in this study. 
While this strategy values the privacy of Facebook members by 
not collecting personally identifying information, it precludes 
certain analytic strategies such as social network analysis. 
However, this study demonstrates how analytic strategies that are 
accessible to social scientists in general, such as factor analysis 
and regression models can be applied to social media data in 
productive ways. Future studies that examine different social 
learning processes via network analysis, different clustering 
algorithms, and other modeling techniques will also make a 
needed contribution to the literature. 

6. CONCLUSIONS 
Learning analytics is a multidisciplinary field that combines the 
technical opportunities of data with social theories drawn from 
learning research. This study demonstrates how these multiple 

perspectives may combine to derive deeper insight into literacy 
development with social media. The meeting of data, theory, and 
methodology in a learning analytics framework also illuminates 
some fundamental implications and tensions. 

Opportunities to Integrate Sociocultural Learning 
Frameworks with new Data Streams. In traditional social 
science and education research traditions, it has often been 
difficult to directly and quantitatively observe sociocultural 
learning concepts and dispositions in a natural way. I argue that 
new media literacies are an example of learning dispositions or 
skills that could be readily observed and measured from social 
media data streams. However, to recognize such opportunities, 
requires researchers to integrate ideas from multiple fields. In this 
study, I was inspired by a theoretical framework of literacy 
forwarded by humanists and media literacy scholars such as 
Jenkins [19]. I was then able to link these concepts of literacy to 
behavioral data culled from a popular, global social network site, 
Facebook. As new media tools become increasingly social in 
focus, researchers may be able to link data streams from these 
platforms to traditionally difficult-to-measure facets of literacy. 

Social media platforms represent a ubiquitous part of individuals’ 
everyday lives. Not only are platforms such as Facebook, spaces 
for networking, but they also represent a place where tremendous 
levels of social learning can occur. Many of these platforms share 
user data through their API’s that offer researchers new 
opportunities to directly examine social learning processes using 
analytics. However, the availability of large amounts of social 
data in popular platforms introduces considerations of privacy and 
ethics in collecting this data. Many companies (such as Facebook) 
have explicit requirements for using participant data and 
researchers would do well to follow these best practices.  

Beyond these regulations there are critical issues related to 
research design that this study demonstrates for future scholars. 
For example, recruitment remains a salient issue for this type of 
research. Despite the potential availability of massive amounts of 
big data, access to this data for social scientists is still bounded by 
actively recruiting participants, unless one is a part of the 
company’s data team itself and can access all the raw data. In this 
study, participants were given two explicit consent opportunities 
(one for the study, and another to share their Facebook data). This 
helps to protect participant privacy, but also demonstrates issues 
such as substantial opt-out rates. Future researchers in this area 
will have to plan for these considerations.  

In addition, I chose to value participant privacy by only collecting 
aggregate numbers of activity. I did not collect identifying 
information such as a Facebook member’s direct ties to others. 
Thus, certain analytic strategies are possible such as factor 
analysis and regression models, while other potentially helpful 
metrics are not available (e.g. social network analysis). These data 
collection choices reflect a tension between research needs and 
privacy of participants. These dilemmas are likely to be worked 
out in each respective study, but future work that can demonstrate 
ethical modes of data collection, while maintaining opportunities 
for diverse analytic strategies, will make a contribution to the 
literature. 

What is Gained and Lost in Analytics? Related to issues of 
theory, data collection and methodology, is a critical discussion of 
what insights are gained and lost with analytics. This study 
demonstrates the tension between abstraction and depth that is 
inherent in learning analytics. On the one hand, the present 
analysis distills the diverse behaviors one can enact in Facebook 
into clear, broader categories of general behavior: messaging, 

142



information sharing, friending, affiliating. Such abstraction helps 
in our conceptual thinking, aiding us in being honest about what 
learning interactions and literacies Facebook activities may 
engender; and equally important, does not afford. Understanding 
that Facebook affords particular behaviors, but not others, helps 
scholars develop finer-grained understanding of how different 
social media platforms might influence learning. Future work in 
social learning analytics is needed to explore whether the 
behaviors observed here also apply to different platforms, and 
have similar or different implications for learning. In addition, 
research that can clearly describe new forms of behavior that 
occur in other platforms will help build deeper understanding of 
how and when social media might be employed to improve 
learning experiences. 
With learning analytics, this abstraction and analysis can occur at 
large scale, and data can be collected unobtrusively in naturally 
occurring online environments. However, a clear consequence of 
abstraction is lack of rich description and detail. An equally 
important discussion with analytics is what insight is lost when 
making specific methodological decisions. For example, in this 
study behaviors such as sharing links and creating friend lists 
were highly related in a factor that I generally organized as 
information sharing. However, individuals always appropriate 
technical features, such as the ability to share links or organize 
one’s Facebook friends into groups, to create diverse and 
surprising cultural practices. The analytic strategy used here 
necessarily abstracts these details out, and other methodologies 
including ethnography of online communities and discourse-
focused methods, are vital to inform learning analytics. 

Implications for learning. One major goal of learning analytics 
is to measure, render visible, and make actionable, individual’s 
learning behaviors [8]. The implications of pursuing these goals in 
the area of new media literacy are numerous. For education 
policymakers and evaluators, having indicators of literacy skills 
may help develop a deeper understanding of learners beyond 
common measures such as standardized tests of content 
knowledge. This study contributes to the growing understanding 
that we may be able to measure such literacies in popular and 
everyday activities such as Facebook participation. Increasingly, 
education stakeholders will be able to observe and value soft-
skills, such as different forms of literacy, in conjunction with 
traditional measures of content knowledge. 

For educators, recognizing the skills that are embedded in 
everyday activity such as Facebook also informs popular debate 
about the role of social media in education. Perhaps the major 
narrative of social media and education should not be about 
whether new social tools can aid in learning traditional content, 
but instead recognize and value literacy skills as a worthy 
outcome in itself. By making literacy skills visible and measurable 
through indicators and metrics, such debates might be more 
grounded in artifacts of shared data. Broad statements such as 
“Using Facebook helps develop new literacy skills” may instead 
evolve into more useful and testable claims such as “Facebook 
activities of messaging and information sharing help young people 
develop critical networking skills” or “Particular activities such as 
more frequent direct communication with others online, may 
influence positive negotiation skills among learners”. The findings 
presented here begin to add more clarity and detail to such 
popular discussions. 

This study only considered the Facebook platform, but nearly 1 
billion individuals participate in this social network, and thus it 
represents a significant context to understand human behavior and 

learning. However, there are a plethora of social media platforms 
that now boast robust membership such as Twitter, Pinterest, 
Instagram and others. These sites cater to very different types of 
participatory behavior and also represent potential opportunities to 
understand learning in social media environments. Future research 
is needed that can examine multiple social media platforms, gain 
access to a larger population of users, and employ diverse 
analytics methods while understanding the constraints of 
collecting data from popular platforms. Continued work that 
explores literacy through learning analytics on popular platforms, 
will make a substantial contribution to education research. 

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I thank Ezra Schwartz for his programming and development of 
the Facebook data collection application for this study; Elizabeth 
Bonsignore, the blind reviewers, and the conference chairs for 
their comments and edits to the manuscript; and the College of 
Education at the University of Maryland, College Park for grant 
support through the Support Program for Advancing Research and 
Collaboration (SPARC). 

8. REFERENCES 
[1] Ahn, J. 2011. The effect of social network sites on 

adolescents’ academic and social development: Current 
theories and controversies. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science & Technology 62(8), 1435-1445. 

[2] Ahn, J. 2012. Teenagers’ experiences with social network 
sites: Relationships to bridging and bonding social capital. 
The Information Society 28(2), 99-109. 

[3] Ahn, J., Subramaniam, M., Fleischmann, K. R., Waugh, A., 
Walsh, G., and Druin, A. 2012. Youth identities as remixers 
in an online community of storytellers: Attitudes, strategies, 
and values. In Proceedings of ASIST 2012: The 75th Annual 
Meeting of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology. 

[4] Barton, A. C., Tan, E., and Rivet, A. 2008. Creating hybrid 
spaces for engaging school science among urban middle 
school girls. American Educational Research Journal 45(1), 
68-103. 

[5] Bienkowski, M., Feng, M., and Means, B. 2012. Enhancing 
teaching and learning through educational data mining and 
learning analytics: An issue brief. U.S. Department of 
Education, Office of Educational Technology, Washington, 
DC. 

[6] boyd, d. m. 2008. Why youth (heart) social network sites: 
The role of networked publics in teenage social life. In 
Youth, Identity, and Digital Media, D. Buckingham, Ed. The 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 119-142. 

[7] boyd, d. m. & Ellison, N. B. 2007. Social network sites: 
Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication 13(1), article 11. 

[8] Buckingham Shum, S., and Ferguson, R. 2012. Social 
learning analytics. Educational Technology & Society 15(3), 
3-26. 

[9] Burke, M., Kraut, R., and Marlow, C. 2011. Social capital on 
facebook: Differentiating uses and users. In Proceedings of 
CHI 2011, ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, 571-580. 

143



[10] Chinn, C. A., and Malhotra, B. A. 2002. Epistemologically 
authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical framework for 
evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education 86(2), 175-218. 

[11] Clegg, T., and Kolodner, J. 2007. Bricoleurs and planners 
engaging in scientific reasoning: A tale of two groups in one 
learning community. Research and Practice in Technology 
Enhanced Learning 2(3), 239-265. 

[12] Dawson, S. 2011. Analytics to literacies: Emergent learning 
analytics to evaluate new literacies. Workshop on New 
Media, New Literacies, and New Forms of Learning. 
http://blogs.ubc.ca/newliteracies/files/2011/12/Dawson.pdf. 

[13] Dede, C. 2010. Comparing frameworks for 21st century 
skills. In 21st century skills: Rethinking how students learn, J. 
A. Bellanca & R. S. Brandt, Eds. Solution Tree Press, 
Bloomington, IN, 51-76. 

[14] Ellison, N. B., Steinfield, C., and Lampe, C. 2011. 
Connection strategies: Social capital implications of 
facebook-enabled communication practices. New Media & 
Society 13(6), 873-892. 

[15] Greenhow, C., and Gleason, B. 2012. Twitteracy: Tweeting 
as a new literacy practice. The Educational Forum 76, 463-
477. 

[16] Greenhow, C., and Robelia, E. 2009. Old communication, 
new literacies: Social network sites as social learning 
resources. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 
14(4), 1130-1161. 

[17] Greenhow, C., Robelia, B., and Hughes, J. E. 2009. Web 2.0 
and classroom research: What path should we take now? 
Educational Researcher 38(4), 246-259. 

[18] Hargittai, E., and Hsieh, Y. P. (2012). Succinct survey 
measures of web-use skills. Social Science Computer Review 
30(1), 95-107. 

[19] Jenkins, H. 2006. Confronting the challenges of participatory 
culture: Media education for the 21st century. The 
MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, IL. 

[20] John-Steiner, V. and Mahn, H. 1996. Sociocultural 
approaches to learning and development: A Vygotskian 
framework. Educational Psychologist 31(3-4), 191–206. 

[21] Lampe, C., Wohn, D. Y., Vitak, J., Ellison, N. B., and Wash, 
R. 2011. Student use of facebook for organizing 
collaborative classroom activities. International Journal of 
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 6(3), 329-347. 

[22] Lemke, J. L. 2001. Articulating communities: Sociocultural 
perspectives on science education. Journal of Research in 
Science Teaching 38(3), 296-316. 

[23] Literat, I. (May 2011). Measuring new media literacies: 
Towards the development of a comprehensive assessment 
tool. Teachers College Educational Technology Conference 
(TCETC). New York, NY. 

[24] Polman, J. L., and Miller, D. 2010. Changing stories: 
Trajectories of identification among African American youth 
in a science outreach apprenticeship. American Educational 
Research Journal 47(4), 879-918. 

[25] Prensky, M. 2001. Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the 
Horizon 9(5), 1-6. 

[26] Rotherham, A. J., and Willingham, D. T. 2010. “21st century 
skills”: Not new, but a worthy challenge. American Educator 
34(1), 17-20. 

[27] Shirky, C. 2011. Cognitive surplus: How technology makes 
consumers into collaborators [reprint edition]. Penguin 
Press, New York, NY. 

[28] Silva, E. 2009. Measuring skills for 21st-century learning. Phi 
Delta Kappan 90(9), 630-634. 

[29] Valkenburg, P. M., and Peter, J. 2009. Social consequences 
of the internet for adolescents. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science 18(1), 1-5. 

 

144





