
Student Empowerment, Awareness, and Self-Regulation through a 
Quantified-Self Student Tool  

Kimberly E. Arnold 
University of Wisconsin-Madison 

1305 Linden Drive 
Madison, WI 53706 

kimberly.arnold@wisc.edu 
 

Casey V. Wright 
Purdue University 
155 S. Grant Street 

West Lafayette, IN 47907 
caseyw@purdue.edu 

Brandon Karcher 
Purdue University 
155 S. Grant Street 

West Lafayette, IN 47907 
bkarcher@purdue.edu 

 
James McKay 

University of Wisconsin-Madison 
1305 Linden Drive 
Madison, WI 53706 

james.mckay@wisc.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
The purpose of this paper is to examine the cross institutional use 
of a quantified-self application called Pattern, which is designed to 
promote self-regulation and reflective learning in learners. This 
paper provides a brief look into how learners report spending their 
time and react to in-app recommendations. Initial data is 
encouraging; however, there are limitations of Pattern, and 
additional research and development must be undertaken. 

CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing~Interactive learning 
environments   • Applied computing~E-learning   • Human-
centered computing~Information visualization 

Keywords 
Learning Analytics; Quantified-Self Student; Self-Regulated 
Learning; Reflective Learning Practices; Higher Education; Real-
Time Feedback; Recommendation Engine; Mobile Application.   

ACM Reference Format: 
K.E. Arnold, B. Karcher, C.V. Wright, and J. McKay, 2017. Student 
Empowerment, Awareness, and Self-Regulation through a Quantified-Self 
Student Tool. In Proceedings of Learning Analytics and Knowledge 
Conference, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 2017, (LAK’17), 2 pages. 
DOI: 10.1145/3027385.3029434  

1. INTRODUCTION 
Institutions of higher education are experiencing record enrollment. 
However, students, as a whole, are arriving at the academy’s door 
less prepared than ever before. [1] Students arrive without the skills 
to thrive at the collegiate level; this is a major issue when learning 
how to learn is a critical factor for success in today’s global  

 
 
economy. [2] Merging self-regulated learning theory and the 
increasingly popular quantified-self movement into an application 
paradigm for education may lead to promising ways to start 
counteracting these shifting academic realities.  

1.1 Self-regulation and reflective learning  
As Tinto is famous for saying, students cannot be absolved from 
responsibility for their own learning; [3] so students need to be 
taught strategies for effective, independent learning. Understanding 
how to self-manage learning activities is paramount in today’s 
knowledge economy. However, monitoring one’s behavior alone 
does not equate to complex self-regulation strategies.  In fact, 
Butler and Winne argue that self-regulated learning is a “deliberate, 
judgmental, adaptive process” which requires consistent feedback. 
[4] Setting goals and devising plans is quintessential to successfully 
unlocking meta-cognitive affordances. [5] 
Research in the monitoring of self-regulated learning has promising 
outcomes. Tabuenca et al. suggest that a positive relationship exists 
between logging study time and levels of self-regulated learning. 
[6] However, automating and scaling tools that can aid students in 
their monitoring (awareness), feedback, and adapting self-
regulation practices is a complicated process. The recent 
emergence of quantified-self student movements within the 
learning analytics community offers additional approaches to 
supporting today’s diverse learners. 
1.2 Quantified-self movement in education  
Major components of the quantified-self movement are awareness 
and behavioral change, and fitness trackers are a common example 
of this technology.  A fitness tracker makes one aware of how much 
activity she is undertaking.  A user considers her desired outcomes, 
and sets a goal for herself. This goal, combined with her awareness 
of her progress toward her goal, motivates her to change her 
behavior when necessary. Taking a translation of a fitness tracker 
and applying it in educational settings has the potential to transform 
how learners approach learning.  Having a technology that enables 
a student to be aware of what effort she is putting into learning, so 
that she can work toward her own personal goal, by optimizing her 
behavior, is one approach to combating potential deficits of self-
directed learning that many students face. Serving as a scaffold for 
meta-cognitive processes, scholars have placed quantified-self 
student technologies in theoretical frameworks for student support 
and learning benefit. [7, 8]

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting 
with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers 
or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
LAK '17, March 13 - 17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029434 
 



LAK’17, April 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada  K. Arnold et al. 

The potential for tapping learning data via quantified-self apps 
could be transformative for learners already heavily reliant upon 
both technology and quantified-self technologies. 
This paper focuses on a quantified-self student tool called Pattern. 
This tool, developed with principles of improved study skills and 
reflective learning as the foundation, provides baseline data about 
effectiveness of such tools in diverse learning environments.  
Pattern empowers learners by providing them an easy way to track, 
analyze, and receive custom feedback about their study activities, 
allowing them to seamlessly make data-informed decisions about 
their study habits.  
2. THE DEVELOPMENT OF PATTERN 
Pattern, a web and mobile application created by Purdue 
University, allows students to track their study habits; tracking 
activity, length, and perceived productivity. This activity log feeds 
a recommendation engine which enables Pattern to provide 
recommendations for students regarding: i) which time period 
during they seem to be most productive, ii) the duration of time in 
which they report being most productive, and for specific activities, 
iii) which time of day they seem to be most productive. These 
recommendations and peer comparisons are automated and 
delivered in real-time. Pattern also allows students to view their 
activity data on a sophisticated dashboard, as well as export a 
record of their study activities. Designed as a student-centric tool, 
access to a student’s identifiable data is controlled by the student. 
Instructors may view a dashboard of aggregate and anonymized 
data for students in their courses. Academic advisors are only 
allowed access to curated student data at an identifiable level if a 
student opts to share it.  

3. EXPLORATORY USE OF PATTERN  
Pattern has been piloted at its home institution, Purdue University, 
as well as the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Although 
designed to be a student-centric tool, for the pilot, both institutions 
took a course-level approach for implementation. This means that 
the majority of students are not using Pattern of their own accord, 
but rather using it either because their instructor requires it or they 
are offered extra credit for participating in a pilot course. Since 
spring 2015 when Pattern went into pilot, 2,140 students have 
actively used the quantified-self tool at Purdue.  Since spring 2016, 
UW-Madison has had roughly 2,200 students actively use Pattern. 
4. EARLY RESULTS 
Purdue and UW-Madison have been deliberate about gathering 
information in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the tool, the 
user experience, and to probe for ways to maximize the potential of 
self-regulated learning.  Since action is the crux of any learning 
analytics application, a focus was placed on the effectiveness of the 
recommendations in motivating students to move beyond 
awareness to behavioral change. Generally, students reported that 
the recommendations given by Pattern were particularly helpful; 
71% of Purdue students and 74% of UW-Madison students who 
voted rated the recommendations as helpful. The recommendations 
are currently fairly general in nature; however, an iterative 
approach is being taken in creating a robust recommendation 
engine that best serves students in various contexts. 
UW-Madison placed a major evaluative lens on the student 
experience of Pattern. Unequivocally, students found Pattern easy 
to use (n=423,  on a 5.0 scale). Students believed that 
Pattern gave them access to information that could not be easily 
accessed elsewhere (n=423,  on a 5.0 scale). Amidst 
concerns of providing students with data visualizations that could 

be misconstrued, students were asked if they understood the 
dashboards and visualization provided by Pattern, and most agreed 
that they did (n=420,  on a 5.0 scale). However, 
participating students had many suggestions for making the tool 
easier and more integral to their study habits. When asked if they 
would use Pattern again in future semesters, 75% (n=321) said they 
would. Examination of text comments showed that students had 
mixed feelings about being compared to their peers, and many 
expressed concern about the anonymity of their data in 
visualizations.   
5. LIMITATIONS 
The most notable limitation of the initial results is that the data is 
self-reported, and may be inaccurate or skewed. Since the data 
visualizations and recommendations are based on self-reported 
data, it should be taken with that context in mind. The results are 
also from a limited set of pilot courses at each institution, and 
therefore are not generalizable.  

6. CONCLUSIONS 
A major tenant of Pattern is student empowerment. Giving students 
the opportunity to systematically examine data about their learning 
behavior, and that of their peers, allows them to leverage the 
affordances of a quantified-self application. By exposing their 
behavioral data, students are informed and can act accordingly. 
With enhanced recommendations and the expansion of the student 
dashboard with additional visualizations, students can adopt a data 
driven approach to how they can be efficient with their time. 
Learning is complex—it cannot be measured in the same way 
respiration, heart beats, or steps can be, and while the accuracy of 
Pattern data is questionable as it is self- reported, this curation of 
data is a start. Over time, quantified-self applications may provide 
significant findings to students, teachers, and researchers. 
7.  REFERENCES 
[1] The College Board (2014). 2014 SAT report on college & 
career readiness. Retrieved 6 October 2016 from:  
https://www.collegeboard.org/program-results/2014/sat. 
[2] Fink, L.D. (2003). Creating significant learning experience: 
An integrated approach to designing college courses. John 
Wiley Sons.   
[3] Tinto, V. (1993) Leaving College: rethinking the causes and 
cures of student attrition (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.  
 [4] Butler, D. L., and Winne, P. H. (1995). Feedback and self-
regulated learning: A theoretical synthesis. Review of educational 
research, 65(3), 245-281, pg 246. 
[5] Winne, P. H., and Hadwin, A. F. (1998). Studying as self-
regulated learning. Metacognition in educational theory and 
practice, 93, 27-30. 
[6] Tabuenca, B., Kalz, M., Drachsler, H., and Specht, M. (2015). 
Time will tell: The role of mobile learning analytics in self-
regulated learning. Computers & Education, 89, 53-74. 
[7] Rivera-Pelayo, V., Zacharias, V., Müller, L., and Braun, S. 
(2012, April). Applying quantified self approaches to support 
reflective learning. In Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (pp. 111-114). 
ACM. 
[8] Eynon, R. (2015). The quantified self for learning: critical 
questions for education. Learning, Media and Technology, 40(4), 
407-411.

 



