
Transitioning self-regulated learning profiles in 
hypermedia-learning environments 

Clarissa Lau1, Jeanne Sinclair2, Michelle Taub3, Roger Azevedo3, Eunice Eunhee Jang1 
 

1Department of Applied Psychology and Human Development, Toronto, ON, Canada 
2Department of Curriculum, Teaching and Learning, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 

3Department of Psychology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA 
 

{clarissa.lau, jeanne.sinclair, eun.jang} @mail.utoronto.ca; {mtaub, razeved} @ncsu.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
Self-regulated learning (SRL) is a process that highly fluctuates as 
students actively deploy their metacognitive and cognitive 
processes during learning. In this paper, we apply an extension of 
latent profiling, latent transition analysis (LTA), which 
investigates the longitudinal development of students’ SRL latent 
class memberships over time. We will briefly review the 
theoretical foundations of SRL and discuss the value of using 
LTA to investigate this multidimensional concept. This study is 
based on college students (n = 75) learning about the human 
circulatory system while using MetaTutor, an intelligent tutoring 
system that adaptively supports SRL and targets specific 
metacognitive SRL processes including judgment of learning 
(JOL) and content evaluation (CE). Preliminary results identify 
transitional probabilities of SRL profiles from four distinct events 
associated with the use of SRL.  

 
CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing~Interactive learning environments 
 
• Computing methodologies~Latent variable models 
 
Keywords 
Self-regulated learning; Information-processing theory; 
Metacognition; Metamemory; Latent transition analysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this 
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work 
owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org. LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada  © 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4870-
6/17/03…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027443 

1 INTRODUCTION 
In dynamic learning environments such as intelligent tutoring 
systems and other advanced learning technologies, students 
continuously adapt to internal (e.g., prior knowledge) and external 
(e.g., effectiveness of systems; feedback and scaffolding) 
conditions by rapidly changing as they interact with the tasks and 
the system, based on accurate use of cognitive and metacognitive 
processes.  
 
This progressive change occurs over multiple stages that require 
high-degree of regulation; however, previous research has 
indicated that students do not automatically develop an ability to 
regulate their SRL knowledge and skills [1, 3]. This warrants a 
need to clarify how students initially develop regulatory behaviors 
and how they shift towards more advanced levels of regulation. 
This paper will investigate the transitional profiles of two aspects 
of self-regulated learning in the context of an online learning 
environment, MetaTutor.  
 

1.1 Self-regulated learning 
Over the course of engaging with learning in a technologically 
rich environment, students are engaged in high complex learning 
processes. Students are expected to acquire knowledge, respond to 
feedback, and evaluate progress – processes that require high-
levels of regulation. In order to achieve success during the 
complex learning process, students must gain agency in directing 
their own learning. Self-regulated learning (SRL) describes 
students’ accurate monitoring and regulation of effective 
cognitive, metacognitive, and motivational knowledge, skills, and 
strategies to learn, problem solve, and perform across tasks [12, 
19]. SRL is a multi-phase process with the following assumptions: 
(1) students plan, monitor, control, and reflect their learning 
strategies and progress [12], and (2) this involves a three-stage 
cyclical process where students engage in orientation and 
planning phase, monitoring and performance phase, and 
evaluation and adaptation phase [18]. These theoretical models of 
SRL collectively suggest that a combination of knowledge, skills, 
and strategies are essential and occur in a sequential and/or 
cyclical manner during learning and problem solving. While these 
models do describe SRL as phases, only one model considers SRL 
as an event that unfolds over time – information-processing theory 
(IPT) [16, 17]. Since this study is examining how SRL profiles 
transition over time, this study will draw specifically from the 
information-processing theory of SRL. 
 
 
 



1.2 Information-processing theory of SRL 
According to the information-processing theory of SRL [16, 17], 
learning occurs through a series of four cyclical (yet not 
necessarily sequential) stages, in which information processing 
and SRL occur. In phase 1, task understanding, students must be 
able to clearly understand the task they are being asked to 
complete. In phase 2, goals and plans, students set appropriate 
goals for accomplishing the given task, along with plans for how 
they expect to achieve those goals. Phase 3, using learning 
strategies, involves students using the learning strategies (i.e., 
cognitive, metacognitive, and motivational SRL processes) they 
planned in the previous phase. In phase 4, adaptation, students 
can make changes to their goals, plans, and use of learning 
strategies to make sure they are using them efficiently. 
Furthermore, within each phase, information processing occurs as 
the interaction of one’s conditions, operations, products, 
evaluations, and standards (COPES). Thus, according to this 
model, students control and monitor their use of information 
processing and SRL strategies during each phase of learning. 
 
1.3 Model of metamemory  
Nelson & Narens’ [10] model of metamemory suggests that 
metacognition occurs at a meta-level, which involves three phases 
of memory-related processes. Thus, engaging in these 
metacognitive processes at the meta-level can influence task 
performance at the object level. Specifically, at the encoding 
phase, students engage in ease of learning (EOL) judgments, 
where they anticipate how easy it will be to accomplish a task. At 
the retrieval phase, students are making judgments of their 
understanding of the material (i.e., judgment of learning or JOLs). 
At the retention phase, students make a retrospective confidence 
judgment (RCJ), where they judge their confidence in their 
performance on the task. According to this model, making these 
metacognitive judgments may impact students’ task performance, 
via memory processes. 
 
1.4 Latent profiling of SRL  
A challenge in understanding SRL is capturing the interactive 
nature of information processing and SRL strategies that students 
deploy in real time during learning. Constructs such as SRL are 
often difficult to observe directly, so traditional research methods 
(e.g., self-reports) will typically infer this behavior after the task is 
completed. However, these methods can hardly capture the 
dynamic and progressive stages of SRL. Recent advances have led 
researchers to use on-line trace methods (e.g., log-files, concurrent 
think-alouds) to measure the real-time deployment of SRL 
processes during learning [1, 2]. The primary difference between 
traditional techniques and latent profiling is: “the common factor 
model decomposes the covariances to highlight relationships 
among the variables, whereas the latent profile model decomposes 
the covariances to highlight relationships among students” [4, p. 
6]. Latent profiling is a latent variable model that identifies 
unobserved subgroups in a population. One study established 
distinct latent profiles of SRL that exist across students and these 
profiles are associated with varying academic outcomes [3]. 
Findings from this study suggested that individuals with minimal 
and disorganized profiles of SRL might demonstrate poorer 
academic outcomes [3]. This approach is a person-centered 
analysis that is more appropriate for understanding a multi-phased 
concept such as SRL. 
 

This study is situated to investigate the unique characteristics of 
students’ self-regulatory learning behaviors at different stages of 
interaction in the online learning environment, MetaTutor. During 
MetaTutor, metacognitive judgments during learning are 
measured by assessing students’ level of confidence in making 
these judgments. This study aims to elucidate unique student 
profiles of SRL and describe the changing states across time.  
 
2 METHOD 
2.1 Participants 
A total of 194 students are included in the study with 99 in the 
control group and 95 in the experimental group. From the 
experimental group, a total of 75 students are included in this 
ongoing study. Students were recruited from three major 
universities across North America. Background information was 
available for only 70 students. Of the 70 students, 53% were 
males and 47% were females. Mean age was M = 20.11 (SD = 
.21) and mean GPA was M = 3.31 (SD = .09). 
 
2.2 MetaTutor 
This study is set in the context of MetaTutor, an intelligent 
tutoring system that is built upon theoretical models of SRL [1, 
13, 16, 17, 18]. The system engages students in biological 
concepts (e.g., the human circulatory system) and provides 
support through offering various strategies to plan, monitor, and 
reflect upon their learning. Students are prompted to set goals 
with respect to their learning and engage in cognitive and 
metacognitive SRL strategies while the system provides feedback 
based on student scores on quizzes and responses to making 
metacognitive judgments, such as JOLs. During the process of 
reading and inspecting hypermedia materials, students are given 
an option to select cognitive learning strategies, such as 
summarizing (SUMM), taking notes (TN), planning (PLAN), 
prior knowledge activation (PKA), and making inferences (INF), 
and metacognitive monitoring processes such as monitoring 
progress towards goals (MPTG), judgment of learning (JOL), 
feeling of knowing (FOK), and content evaluation (CE) from an 
SRL palette provided by the system’s interface. These processes 
include: This study will examine two of these processes: judgment 
of learning (JOL) and content evaluation (CE). Below is a 
screenshot of the MetaTutor main interface (See Figure 1). The 
interface includes elements designed to foster effective SRL, such 
as a timer (top left), a table of contents (left, below the timer), 
content (center), overall learning goal and sub-goals (top center), 
a pedagogical agent (top right), and the SRL palette (right, below 
the agent). 
 
Participants’ background knowledge of biological concepts 
ranged from no experience to some experience (i.e., taken 1-5 
undergraduate science courses). Prior to learning, participants 
were randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions: 
prompt and feedback, or control. In the prompt and feedback 
condition, participants were prompted to use cognitive and 
metacognitive SRL strategies, and were provided with immediate 
feedback on their performance. Additionally, participants could 
self-initiate the use of these SRL processes, and were still 
provided feedback on their performance. In the control condition, 
participants were not prompted to engage in SRL strategies, nor 
were they provided with feedback if they self-initiated the use of 
these processes. As such, participants in the control condition 
were left to work independently without being provided with any 
guidance from the system. 



 
 
 
2.3 Metacognitive monitoring process 
For this analysis, we selected the metacognitive monitoring 
processes: judgment of learning (JOL) and content evaluation 
(CE), as research has shown these processes to be influential in 
learning about complex science topics [1, 5, 7]. 
 
2.3.1 Judgment of learning 
Judgments of learning (JOLs) require students to assess their 
understanding of the material they are currently reading [1, 2, 5, 
7]. This strategy requires learners to monitor their comprehension 
of the material, which is an effective strategy as it makes them 
actively aware of their progress during learning. Moreover, once 
this judgment is made, students can select the appropriate 
subsequent cognitive learning strategies to use, based on the 
valence of that judgment (i.e., JOL+: I understand this or JOL-: I 
do not understand this). For example, a student who does 
understand the material can go on to take notes on the content 
(i.e., cognitive strategy of taking notes) compared to a student 
who does not understand the material, who should re-read the 
material as the subsequent cognitive learning strategy. It is 
important to emphasize that valence is associated with the 
accuracy of a metacognitive judgment and we can therefore 
assume that a metacognitive-strategy dyad can either be adaptive 
(e.g., a JOL- followed by re-reading the same materials) or 
maladaptive (e.g., a JOL- followed by reading additional 
research).  
 
2.3.2 Content evaluation 
Content evaluations (CEs) involve students assessing whether the 
current content is relevant to the sub-goal they are working on [1, 
2, 6, 7] making them aware of the relevancy of the material they 
are reading. When making a CE, the student evaluates the 
relevancy of the text and the diagram on the content page, thereby 
monitoring the material they are reading to accomplish their sub-
goals. Similar to JOLs, there is also a valence component 
associated with making this metacognitive evaluation, such that 
the content can be relevant to the current sub-goal (i.e., CE+), 
which should be followed by continuing to read that page, inspect 
the diagram, and take notes or summarize the material. In 
contrast, an evaluation of the content as being irrelevant to the 
current sub-goal (i.e., CE-), would be followed by changing pages 
to a relevant one.  
 
Many research studies investigating the impact of JOLs on 
learning have revealed that making these judgments can positively 
impact learning [1, 5]. One main focus of research on JOLs has 

been on assessing how students’ levels of confidence (i.e., the 
judgments they make) impact their subsequent learning [5]. 
Additionally, research investigating the use of CEs has suggested 
that selecting more relevant content pages obtain higher 
performance scores [14] Although this research demonstrates the 
importance of judging one’s understanding of content and 
selecting relevant pages for completing sub-goals, research is 
lacking on assessing how the accuracy of these judgments change 
over time. 
 
2.4 Latent transition analysis 
Latent transition analysis (LTA) is an extension of latent class 
analysis (LCA) that identifies underlying traits longitudinally. 
LCA is a statistical model that groups individuals together based 
on unobserved traits (i.e. latent traits) that are inferred with 
categorical variables [6]. LCA outputs latent classes that describe 
distinct behaviors shared by a group of individuals. Extending 
from LCA, LTA describes changes in these latent classes across 
time and transitional probabilities are estimated. These latent 
classes are not assumed to be static, but rather, individuals may be 
described with different classes at different times.  
 
The most appropriate LTA model for describing a population of 
individuals sharing similar behaviors is estimated with three sets 
of parameters. First, latent status membership probabilities are 
estimated for subsequent times after the first time point. These 
probabilities recognize the proportion of individuals that would 
belong in any given latent class. Second, transition probabilities 
are calculated to identify the chance of students changing from 
one latent class from one time point to another latent class at the 
next time point. Third, model-fit indices are used to determine the 
relationship between the observed indicates and the latent class. 
Three model-fit indices are typically used: likelihood-ratio G2 fit 
statistic, Akaike Information Criteria (AIC), and Bayesian 
Information Criteria (BIC). For interpretation, larger values of 
likelihood-ratio G2 value indicate rejection of the null-hypothesis 
[9] while smaller values of AIC and BIC are indicators of better 
model fit [3]. For this study, LTA was conducted in SAS with the 
PROC LTA procedure [8]. 
 
3 RESULTS 
Latent transition analysis for 2-, 3-, and 4- class solutions was 
conducted. The two-class model was considered due to low AIC 
and BIC values, but classes and transitions lacked interpretability. 
The selected model is the three-class solution, as it was the most 
parsimonious, had the best goodness of fit statistics of 
interpretable models, and offered the most useful interpretation. 
Table 1 indicates the model fit statistics for the 2-, 3-, and 4-class 
models. 
 
According to this model, all members of Class 1 (n=20) correctly 
identified content relevant to their sub-goal (CE). Approximately 
58% of this class judged their learning (JOL) with correct 
confidence or under-confidence in light of their page quiz results, 
while 42% were overconfident. Thus this class has strength in CE 
and emerging skills in JOLs. The members of Class 2 (n=39) have 
the contrasting profile: all of Class 2 exhibited accurate or under-
confident JOL, but only approximately 55% of Class 2 correctly 
identified the relevance of page/image content for their sub-goal. 
As such, class 2 exhibits strength in JOL and emerging CE. Class 
3 consists of learners who exhibit challenges in both JOLs and 
CEs. 100% of Class 3 (n=16) learners exhibited overconfidence in 
JOL, and 100% also incorrectly identified content relevant to their 

Figure 1. Main interface of MetaTutor tutoring system. 



current learning sub-goal (CE). Classes are constrained to have 
the same composition over the two time points. 
 

Table 1. Comparison of LTA models. 
Number 
of classes G

2 df AIC BIC 

2 6.813 8.000 20.813 37.035 

3 1.833 1.000 29.833 62.278 

4 0.000 -8.000 46.000 99.302 
Note: Bold font indicates the selected model. 
 
Table 2. Item-response probabilities (probability of item 
response given latent status), prevalence of latent statuses, and 
transition probabilities in latent status membership. 
 Latent Status 

 Class 1 
(n=20): 
Strong 
CE, 
emerging 
JOL 

Class 2 
(n=39): 
Strong 
JOL, 
emerging 
CE 

Class 3 
(n=16): 
Overconfident 
JOL,  
incorrect  
CE 

Item-response 
probabilities: 

   

JOL    

Under or correct 
confidence 

0.576 >0.999 <0.001 

Overconfidence 0.424 <0.001 >0.999 

CE    

Incorrect <0.001 0.455 >0.999 

Correct 0.999 0.545 <0.001 

Prevalence of statuses 
at: 

   

Time 1 0.269 0.517 0.213 

Time 2 0.454 0.478 0.066 

Transitions from Time 
1 (rows) to  
Time 2 (columns): 

   

    Class 1: Strong  
    CE, emerging JOL 

0.370 0.630 <0.001 

Class 2: Strong 
JOL, emerging CE 

0.617 0.280 0.103 

Class 3: 
Overconfident JOL 
and  
incorrect CE 

0.168 0.769 0.062 

Note: Item-response probabilities are constrained to be equal at 
time points 1 and 2. Bold font indicates membership in the same 
latent status at both time points. 
 
According to Table 2, there were more than 75% of students in 
Class 3 who demonstrated difficulty with both JOL and CE. Of 
this group, more than 75% improved their judgment of learning, 
and approximately 17% improved their content evaluation skills. 
Just 6% of the original Class 3 remained in Class 3. Overall, the 
probability of being in this class decreased approximately 15% 

from the initial measurement in time point 1 to the final 
measurement in time point 2. This is a remarkable finding, 
considering their time with the MetaTutor program was limited to 
only a few hours at most. 
 
Table 2 also indicates that approximately 63% of students in Class 
1 (Strong CE/Emerging JOL) transitioned to Class 2 (Strong 
JOL/Emerging CE) at time point 2, while 61% of students did the 
reverse. There was less than 0.001 probability that students in 
Class 1 transitioned to Class 3 (Overconfident JOL/Incorrect CE), 
but approximately 10% of Class 2 did transition to Class 3, 
indicating that they were more likely than Class 1 to exhibiting 
overconfidence and incorrect CE after engaging with the 
MetaTutor system.  
 
4 DISCUSSION  
This ongoing research is intended to elucidate the transitioning 
profiles of SRL in the context of MetaTutor. Extending from 
previous literature investigating the construct and latent nature of 
SRL [3, 11, 12], this study investigates the changing latent SRL 
profiles over two time points.  
 
Preliminary results indicated that a three-class solution best fit the 
model. It is important to remember that transitioning from Class 1 
(strong CE, emerging JOL) to 2 (strong JOL, emerging CE), or 
the reverse, does not indicate that there has been a weakening of 
the other skill. Students transitioning from one class to another 
class are now demonstrating a different profile of JOLs and CEs. 
The findings of this study indicate that students exhibit different 
combinations of SRL behaviors across short time periods. Further 
inferential statistics are required to clarify which combinations 
maximize performance outcomes. 
Class 3 (i.e., learners who demonstrate challenges in both JOL 
and CE) is an interesting profile to mention. More than 75% of 
this class later demonstrated the significant improvements in their 
JOL and approximately 17% of these students improved their CE. 
An explanation may be found in the tailored feedback provided by 
MetaTutor. The feedback given by MetaTutor is tailored 
specifically to students’ input, with over 20 different feedback 
responses. The time that students spend engaging in MetaTutor 
improves their outcomes relative to their area(s) of weakness. For 
example, of those who were in Class 1 at time point 1 (emerging 
JOL), more than half made gains in JOL, ending up in Class 2. A 
similar result is exhibited for Class 2, with over half of the 
members of Class 2 at time point 1 transitioning to Class 1 at time 
point 2. This can potentially be attributed to the tailored feedback 
that students received in their area of weakness as they engaged 
with MetaTutor. In support of this thought, an earlier study by 
Thompson [15] found that general feedback did not significantly 
improve accuracy of students’ confidence-recall, but instead 
found that students’ confidence-recall improved when feedback 
was given for specific types of questions.  

We recognize a limitation to this preliminary study. JOL and CE 
events were only included when feedback was provided. 
Therefore, students who were in the control condition were not 
included in the preliminary analysis and the sample size was 
reduced.  
 
4.1 Next Steps 
We do intend to continue the analysis by investigating predictive 
relationships between the transitioning SRL profiles and 
performance outcomes (e.g., setting sub-goals, time spent on task, 



and outcome on quiz and post-test scores). Next, the current 
constructs of JOL and CE have been dichotomized for the 
preliminary analysis; however, JOL and CE constructs do consist 
of more than one dimension (e.g., relevancy of text vs. relevancy 
of diagram). Further investigation would be required to 
appropriate categorize these constructs so these constructs can be 
more accurately represented in the analysis. Finally, the nature of 
feedback is particularly interesting and would require further 
investigation to understand how different students demonstrating 
various SRL profiles would respond to tailored feedback. 
 
5 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The research presented in this paper has been supported by 
funding from National Science Foundation (DRL1431552) and 
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada 
(SSHRC 895-2011-1006). Any opinions, findings, and 
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are 
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the National Science Foundation or Social Sciences and 
Humanities Research Council of Canada. The authors of this 
study would like to acknowledge Nicholas Mudrick for his 
involvement with MetaTutor.    
 
6 REFERENCES 
[1] Azevedo, R., Harley, J., Trevors, G., Duffy, M., Feyzi-

Behnagh, R., Bouchet, F., and Landis, R. S. 2013. Using 
trace data to examine the complex roles of cognitive, 
metacognitive, and emotional self-regulatory processes 
during learning with multi-agent systems. In R. Azevedo & 
V. Aleven, Eds. International handbook of metacognition 
and learning technologies, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: 
Springer 2013, 427-449.  

[2] Azevedo, R., Moos, D. C., Johnson, A. M., and Chauncey, 
A. D. 2010. Measuring cognitive and metacognitive 
regulatory processes during hypermedia learning: Issues and 
challenges. Educational Psychologist, 45, 4, 210-223. 

[3] Barnard-Brak, L., Lan., W. Y., and Paton, V. O. 2010. 
Profiles in self-regulated learning in the online learning 
environment. The International Review of Research in Open 
and Distributed Learning, 11, 1, 61-80. 

[4] Bauer, D. J., and Curran, P. J. 2004. The integration of 
continuous and discrete latent variable models: Potential 
problems and promising opportunities. Psychological 
Methods, 8, 338-363. 

[5] Dunlosky, J., and Lipko, A. 2007. Metacomprehension: A 
brief history and how to improve its accuracy. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 228–232.  

[6] Goodman, L. A. 1974. Exploratory latent structure analysis 
using both identifiable and unidentifiable 
models. Biometrika., 61, 215–231. 

[7] Greene, J. A., and Azevedo, R. 2009. macro-level analysis of 
SRL processes and their relations to the acquisition of 

sophisticated mental models. Contemporary Educational 
Psychology, 34, 18–29. 

[8] Lanza, S. T., and Collins, L. M. 2010. A new SAS procedure 
for latent transition analysis: Transitions in dating and sexual 
risk behavior. Dev Psychol, 44, 2, 446-456. 

[9] Lanza, S. T., Dziak, J. J., Huang, L., Xu, S., and Collins, L. 
M. 2011. Proc LCA & Proc LTA users ‘guide (Version 
1.2.6). University Park, PA: The Methodology Center, Penn 
State University. Retrieved from http://methodology.psu.edu 

[10] Nelson, T. O., and Narens, L. 1990. Metamemory: A 
theoretical framework and new findings. The Psychology of 
Learning and Motivation, 26, 125-173.  

[11] Pintrich, P. R. 2000. The role of goal orientation in self-
regulated learning. In M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich, & M. 
Zeidner, Eds. Handbook of self-regulation, New York, NY: 
Academic Press, 452-502. 

[12] Pintrich, P. R., and De Groot, E. V. 1990. Motivational and 
self-regulated learning components of classroom academic 
performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 1, 33-
40. 

[13] Schunk, D. 2005. Self-regulated learning: The educational 
legacy of Paul R. Pintrich. Educational Psychologist, 40, 85–
94. 

[14] Taub, M., Azevedo, R., Bouchet, F., Clodfelter, E., and 
Mudrick, N. 2014. Can scaffolds from pedagogical agents 
influence effective completion of sub-goals during learning 
with a multi-agent hypermedia-learning environment? In 
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of the 
Learning Sciences (Boulder, Colorado 2014), 1052-1056. 

[15] Thompson, W. B. 1998. Metamemory accuracy: Effects of 
feedback and the stability of individual differences. 
American Journal of Psychology, 111, 1, 33-42. 

[16] Winne, P., and Hadwin, A. 1998. Studying as self-regulated 
learning. In D. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A. Graesser, Eds. 
Metacognition in educational theory and practice, Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum, 227-304. 

[17] Winne, P., and Hadwin, A. 2008. The weave of motivation 
and self-regulated learning. In D. Schunk & B. Zimmerman, 
Eds. Motivation and self-regulated learning: Theory, 
research, and applications, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 297-314. 

[18] Zimmerman, B. J. 1998. Developing self-fulfilling cycles of 
academic regulation: An analysis of exemplary instructional 
models. In D. H. Schunk, & B. J. Zimmerman, Eds. Self-
regulated learning: from teaching to self-reflective practice , 
New York: Guilford Press, 1-99. 

[19] Zimmerman, B. J. 2008. Investigating self-regulation and 
motivation: Historical background, methodological 
developments, and future prospects, American Educational 
Research Journal, 45, 166-183.

 



