
Crafting Transformative Strategies for Personalized 
Learning/Analytics 

 

Linda L. Baer 
Minnesota State University, Mankato 

315 Wigley Administration 
Mankato, MN  56001 

1-507-389-1333 
linda.baer@mnsu.edu 

 

Donald Norris 
Strategic Initiatives, Inc. 

12209 Jonathons Glen Way 
Hendon, VA  20170 

1-703-450-5255 
dmn@strategicinitiatives.com 

Ann Hill Duin 
University of Minnesota 
315 Pillsbury Drive SE 

Minneapolis, MN  55455 
1-612-625-9259 

ahduin@umn.edu 

Robert Brodnick 
Strategic Initiatives, Inc. 

12209 Jonathons Glen Way 
Hendon, VA  20170 

1-703-450-5255 
robert@strategicinitiatives.com 

 

ABSTRACT 
Personalized learning environments and learning analytics hold 
the promise to transform learning experiences, enhance and 
accelerate student success, and “open up” student learning to 
resources and experiences from outside individual institutions.  To 
achieve their potential, personalized learning projects must move 
beyond individual, stand-alone projects or innovations to 
reshaping the institutional experience.  
 
Learning science must connect with learning pedagogy and 
design.  Learners and institutions must have access to tools and 
resources that assist in customizing student progress and 
supplemental learning needs. Teachers and faculty must be 
empowered to provide teaching and learning environments that 
allow individual students to thrive.  All this will require unique 
partnerships and collaborations within and across institutions, 
incorporating the best learning science findings and bridging with 
public and private entities developing the learning and analytic 
tools to support personalized learning. 
 
Crafting a strategy to embrace and sustain the transformative 
power of personalized learning systems will require strong 
leadership and clear planning models to align with institutional 
planning and future investments. 

General Terms 
Measurement 

Keywords 
Academic analytics, learning analytics, personalized learning, 
collaboration, strategic planning. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Learning science researchers and practitioners provide extensive 
evidence that learning can be improved, unleashed and 
revolutionized.  Thomas and Brown [1] have stated that learning 
is happening all around us, not just in the classroom.  “What 
happens to learning when we move from the stable infrastructure 
of the twentieth century to the fluid infrastructure of the twenty-
first century where technology is constantly creating and 
responding to change?”   

The growing digital, networked infrastructure is amplifying our 
ability to access and use nearly unlimited resources and incredible 
instruments to connect learners with learning. This new type of 
learning requires us to shift our thinking about education from 
traditional forms to augment learning at every facet and stage of 
life. Thomas and Brown call it the “arc of life learning.” 

2. PERSONALIZED LEARNING 
The U. S. Department of Education [2] reports that: 
"Personalization refers to instruction that is paced to learning 
needs [i.e. individualized], tailored to learning preferences [i.e. 
differentiated], and tailored to the specific interests of different 
learners. In an environment that is fully personalized, the learning 
objectives and content as well as the method and pace may all 
vary.” 

2.1 Technology and Personalized Learning 
Products 
Technological advances now provide personalized products, 
services and user experiences, though education has only 
scratched the surface on the potential to personalize the learner 
experience.  Personalization is affecting many aspects of our lives 
today in terms of customer data and virtual communities.  
Technology can bring an improved understanding of performance 
levels, learning styles and learning preferences and the capacity 
for instructional strategies and content to better meet learning 
needs.  Tools now can enable a customized approach to learning 
as adaptive and personalized as a private one on one lesson. 
Content is smart, feedback is adaptive to the individual learner 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
LAK'13, Apr 08-12 2013, Leuven, Belgium 
ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04. 

275



progression, and learning paths are personalized to each 
individual student.  In the Smart Sparrow adaptive learning 
platform [3], the focus is on promoting learning by doing, being 
intelligent and adaptive, and empowering teachers. Using the 
Knewton product, the online content is continuously adapted for 
each individual student. Knewton now includes a partnership with 
Pearson’s MyLabs and Mastering software, which are now used 
by about 10 million students [4]. 

2.2 Role of Educators 
Teachers must actively engage with this new environment as 
adaptive authoring tools will be required to change content and 
analytics will be required to inform learners, teachers and advisors 
about how students are learning and collaborative environments.  
Teachers now work with professional developers and designers to 
make truly interactive and learner rich content. 
 
Personalized learning requires that teachers and students have 
real-time access to meaningful data to better facilitate each 
student's experience. This also requires sophisticated data and 
assessment systems, which track, illustrate, and translate the data 
in an on-going way into specific information that informs the 
student and teacher, as well as the instructional tools, content, and 
learning approach best suited for the student.   

2.3 Transformation of Learning 
The promise of transforming learning experiences, enhancing and 
accelerating student success resides within the personalized 
learning environments, learning analytics, as well as opening up 
student learning to resources and experiences from outside 
individual institutions.  
 
To achieve their potential, personalized learning projects must 
move beyond individual, stand-alone projects or innovations to 
reshaping the institutional experience.  This will require a 
strategic understanding of the transformative promise of 
personalization to maximize student learning potential. 
 
Personalized, open learning initiatives have been developing in 
higher education for some time.  The launch and sustainability of 
personalized learning requires new collaborations and 
partnerships from the learning sciences, brain research, learning 
pedagogy, instructional design and delivery.  In addition, creative 
partnerships are evolving with higher education learning projects 
and technology vendors. Carnegie Mellon’s Open Learning 
Initiative, the Next Gen Learning projected funded by The Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation, and major projects funded by the EU 
have gathered attention.  Major educational publishers such as 
Pearson, McGraw-Hill, Wiley & Sons and Cengage Learning 
have long been transposing their textbook content on to dynamic 
online platforms that are equipped to collect data from students 
that are interacting with it. Huge instructional software vendors 
such as Blackboard, Ellucian, and D2L have invested in analytics 
tools that aim to predict student success based on data logged by 
their client universities’ enterprise software systems.  
 
Knewton’s partnership with Arizona State University has received 
considerable attention in the US, and other companies are 
emerging worldwide. The University has established a Learning 
Science Institute and ASU Online, the massive online arm that the 
university co-runs with Pearson, the for-profit education 
company. “It is a place... where ideas and university research 
become new technology and commercial enterprises,…A place 
where the future is invented.”[4] 

Smart Sparrow Adaptive eLearning PlatformTM [5] is an 
entrepreneurial toolset that includes adaptive tutorials, virtual 
labs, smart courses, serious games and simulations.  The Platform 
is a web-based suite of tools that let teachers create rich, 
interactive and adaptive learning experiences. We know that 
“hands on” learning leads to the best possible education outcome 
and fosters student engagement and the Adaptive eLearning 
Platform is particularly suited for this mode of learning. Because 
Smart Sparrow is “intelligent”, it adapts to students as they learn, 
giving them instant feedback and delivering lessons and activities 
at different levels of difficulty depending on how a student is 
performing.  

2.4 Collaborations and Federated Solutions 
Optimizing student success is imperative for expanding higher 
education worldwide. Intelligent investments are needed to garner 
wide support and can be justified through return on investment 
(ROI) or even better, value on investment (VOI).  Moreover, 
improving performance, productivity, and institutional 
effectiveness are the new gold standards for institutional 
leadership in the 21st century. Personalized learning systems and 
associated analytics are critical to both student success and 
institutional effectiveness. This connects with federated solution 
providers, adaptive learning, and the development of creative 
collaborations. 

3. THE PANEL DISCUSSION 
Using a set of four framing questions, panelists will explore and 
debate the facets of how to encourage the engaged use of 
personalized learning/analytics and how to craft strategies for 
using PL/A to transform the institution. 

3.1 How might personalized/adaptive learning 
move beyond pilots to potentially 
transformative technology? 
Personalized, adaptive learning and learning sciences, and the 
analytics embedded in them, have the potential to transform 
learning. They accelerate learning, the acquisition of 
competences, and the capacity to demonstrate mastery. They 
enhance student success. They also have the potential to span 
organizational boundaries, open up institution-centric learning, 
and create “connected” learning across all settings.  Given this 
potential, why such reticence to move beyond prototypes to 
deployments at scale across institutions? Panelists will explore 
and debate how to engage institutional stakeholders and craft 
strategies. 

3.2 How should institutions leverage this 
emerging marketplace of homegrown and 
solution provider options? 
Personalized, open learning initiatives have been developing 
across higher education for some time.  Examples include 
Carnegie Mellon’s Open Learning Initiative and the Next Gen 
Learning projected funded by The Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation. Projects funded by the EU include the Responsive 
Open Learning Environments and the Generic Responsive 
Adaptive Personalized Learning Environment (GRAPPLE) 
focused on learning support.  

Moreover, technology vendors have been rolling out a wide range 
of personalized learning solutions that are available as hosted 
solutions.  Knewton’s partnership with Arizona State University 
has received considerable attention in the US, and other 
companies are emerging worldwide, including Smart Sparrow.  

276



Might the killer app for higher education come when personalized 
learning and leaning sciences are embedded in MOOCs and this 
offering is made available globally? 

This wide emerging and evolving marketplace of personalized 
learning options is available to institutions and individual 
educators. How should institutional leaders consider these options 
as they craft partnerships and strategic plans for personalized 
learning? Will educators embrace these institutional plans or go it 
alone? 

3.3 How might institutions nurture their 
commitments to personalized 
learning/analytics? 
Some institutions have found a way to foster an institution-wide 
commitment to personalized learning through active engagement 
with educators.  For example, University of Minnesota Rochester, 
led by a visionary Chancellor starting a new campus, has 
implemented “an intelligent system for education and assessment 
of learning.”  Building a new campus provided the opportunity for 
establishing a pervasive culture of behaviors in support of risk 
taking, measurement, and continuous improvement, and 
embedded predictive analytics in a system called iSEAL. The 
challenge confronting higher education is to introduce these 
innovations, at scale, across higher education. Panelists will 
explore and debate the challenges of nurturing commitments to 
personalized learning and analytics, whether that be as part of 
starting a new campus or of working with established campuses. 

3.4 How might institutions align personalized 
learning/analytics with institutional strategy? 
Personalized, adaptive learning indeed can be transformative to 
individual institutions.  It might also be the ingredient that can 

turn MOOCs into a killer app.  How can institutions transform 
their strategic planning to accommodate this potential by aligning 
strategy for PLE/Analytics with institutional strategies?  How can 
institutions advance innovations in personalized learning/analytics 
and build/acquire the organizational capacity to do so?   
 
The exponential growth in marketplace options can lead to 
distrust among educators as institutional leaders explore platforms 
and engage vendor partners. How might institutional leadership 
build trust that leads to sustained effort? This perspective will 
focus on how to embed PLE/analytics in institutional strategic 
planning, crafting strategy, advancing innovation and committing 
to organizational develop, and leveraging both internal and 
external partnerships and collaborations. 

4. REFERENCES 
[1] Thomas, D. and Brown, J. S. 2011. A New Culture of 

Learning. Douglas Thomas and John Seely Brown. 
[2] National Education Technology Plan. 

http://www.ed.gov/technology/netp-2010 
[3] https://www.smartsparrow.com/ 
[4] Kolowich, S. 2013. The new intelligence. Inside Higher 

Education. 
http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2013/01/25/arizona-st-
and-knewtons-grand-experiment-adaptive-learning  

[5] https://www.smartsparrow.com/adaptive-elearning/ 
 
 

 

277





