
Introduction to Data Mining for Educational Researchers 
Christopher A. Brooks 

School of Information 
University of Michigan 

brooksch@umich.edu 

Craig Thompson 
Department of Computer Science 

University of Saskatchewan 
craig.thompson@usask.ca 

Vitomir Kovanovi? 
School of Informatics 

University of Edinburgh 
v.kovanovic@ed.ac.uk 

  

CCS Concepts 
Computing methodologies ? Machine learning ? Machine 
learning approaches 

Keywords 
Data mining, learning analytics, predictive modeling 

1. INTRODUCTION & MOTIVATION 
The goal of this tutorial is to share data mining tools and 
techniques used by computer scientists with educational social 
scientists.  We broadly define educational social scientists as 
being made up of people with backgrounds in the learning 
sciences, cognitive psychology, and educational research.  The 
learning analytics community is heavily populated with 
researchers of these backgrounds, and we believe those that find 
themselves at the intersection of research, theory, and practice 
have a particular interest in expanding their knowledge of data-
driven tools and techniques. 

A version of this tutorial was presented by Brooks, Pardos, and 
Thompson at LAK14 in Indianapolis. That tutorial sold out, and 
participant feedback was strong enough that the tutorial was 
offered again at LASI14 at Harvard. This proposal is heavily 
based on the LAK14 proposal, and includes updates to the 
curriculum based on participant feedback. 

One popular tool used by computer scientists for data mining is 
the Weka toolkit.  It is open source, free, and easy to use.  To 
apply Weka to educational datasets correctly, however, one 
requires knowledge of the features, limitations, and subtleties of 
the underlying techniques.  These aspects of the data mining 
process are often not immediately clear, and even just a little time 
exploring these techniques with experts using realistic datasets 
can be beneficial in increasing practical data mining skills.  The 
Weka toolkit offers a variety of advanced machine learning 
mechanisms, allowing attendees to further explore the field further 
after the tutorial. 

We intend for this tutorial to be one way to facilitate this cross-
disciplinary discussion.  With a focus on practical skill building 
and hands on learning, we aim to explore with attendees the 

different data mining techniques can be applied at this intersection 
of research, theory, and practice.  We expect attendees will leave 
the tutorial with not only a deeper understanding of how data 
mining can be applied to their research questions, but a feeling of 
empowerment in being able to carry out initial analysis directly. 

2. OBJECTIVES 
By the end of this course we expect that attendees are able to: 

1. Describe the differences between supervised and 
unsupervised classification 

2. Understand how to choose a classification method for a 
particular research question 

3. Frame different kinds of educational datasets in a way 
that is appropriate for data mining 

4. Contextualize the results of a J48 decision tree to their 
research questions 

5. Contextualize the results of k-means clustering to their 
research questions 

6. Apply knowledge of the Weka toolkit to create decision 
trees or clusters of new educational datasets 

While there are many education and learning conferences that 
include computer scientists and educational social scientists (e.g. 
EDM, AIED, ITS, LAK, ICLS, CSCL, etc.), to our knowledge 
there has been no other tutorial series focused explicitly on 
introductory methods of data mining for practitioners. The closest 
relevant resource we have observed is the recently offered free 
course on Data Mining with Weka offered by the University of 
Waikato1. While this content is an excellent way to learn the 
Weka toolkit, it has not been largely advertised in the educational 
technology and learning sciences communities, and it does not 
focus on educational datasets or questions of learning outcomes.  
We view our proposed tutorial at Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge as one way of contextualizing the kind of instruction 
that is available in this complimentary online course. 

3. TARGET GROUP 
This tutorial is aimed at educational researchers who are from 
traditional social science backgrounds.  Explicitly, it is not 
intended for computer scientists who have a background in 
statistical analysis or artificial intelligence. Nonetheless, we 
expect that junior graduate students in the computer sciences may 
find this tutorial useful, and experience suggests that they are able 
to use this opportunity to share their own experiences with data 
mining methods in education. 

Administrators, program directors, and higher education decision 
makers are a third sub-population of the LAK community.  This 

                                                                 
1 See http://wekamooc.blogspot.com/ 

 

 
 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other 
uses, contact the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  
LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  
ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04.  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883879  



tutorial expects only basic understanding of statistics (mean, error, 
ANOVA, etc.), and we believe will be accessible to this group of 
attendees as well. While we have not finalized the datasets we will 
use for the tutorial, we expect data at the institutional level (e.g. 
student admission and registration data) to be part of this, making 
the tutorial inclusive for attendees who are interested in 
institutional educational analytics as well. One significant revision 
to the tutorial from previous iterations is that we aim to use a real 
educational dataset that is similar to the datasets any university or 
college would have available for analysis. 

4. FORMAT 
A schedule for this half-day tutorial2 is as follows: 

• A short overview of what kinds of educational problems 
classification in data mining has been applied to, along 
with a description of research questions that 
classification is not well suited to answering (20 mins) 

• A guided example of building J48 decision trees using 
Weka.  Attendees will be given access to real datasets, 
and walked through the various parameters (leaf size, 
ten fold testing, etc.) available in the Weka toolkit. (40 
mins) 

• A discussion of understanding the results of the decision 
tree process, such as how to read the confusion matrix, 
understanding rules in the tree, etc.  Participants will be 
encouraged to explore parameters of the classification, 
and relate these to outcomes. (30 mins) 

• Coffee Break (15 mins) 

• An introduction to what cluster analysis is, and a guided 
example of applying k-means to real datasets.  
Attendees will be walked through the process, and will 
cluster the data using various kinds of parameters. (40 
mins) 

• A discussion of understanding the results of clustering.  
E.g. what is a centroid, how to measure the quality of 
the cluster analysis, applications of clustering in other 
educational areas. (30 mins) 

• A wrap up discussion reviewing the objects of the 
tutorial, next steps for participants who wish to learn 
more, and general questions about educational data (20 
mins) 

Depending upon the background, number of individuals, interest 
of attendees, and time, additional content may be provided: 

• Comparison with other statistical techniques for 
classification (e.g. logistic regression) 

• Attribute selection with weka (e.g. CFS) 

• Balancing datasets with SMOTE 

• Applying trained models to new classify data 

• Using Weka to clean datasets 
As this will be a hands-on tutorial, attendees are expected to bring 
with them computing equipment such as laptops, and attendance 

                                                                 
2 The schedule for previous iterations of this tutorial, as well as 

recordings of those tutorials, can be found online at 
https://sites.google.com/a/umich.edu/lak-2014-tutorial-
introduction-to-data-mining-for-educational-researchers/ 

should be limited to 20 persons.  The organizers will provide 
copies of the Weka toolkit (open source and cross platform), as 
well as a selection of educational datasets. A projector for the 
presentations, as well as tables for attendees to work at, are 
minimum equipment requirements. 

This tutorial is not only beneficial for established researchers, but 
also for graduate students.  The LAK community is very much 
global in nature and, given travel limitations, we are interested in 
exploring whether the event can be recorded or webcast as a 
SOLAR Storm3 or high quality captured content analogous to a 
mini-MOOC.  While there are logistics and additional costs (high 
speed network connection, potentially camera and audio rental 
equipment) required with such an activity, we believe the impact 
this tutorial will have on the broader LAK community will be 
multiplied with a persistent online resource.  If this ends up being 
a viable option, we will seek other off-site collaborators to help 
manage the remote help requests using screensharing, live 
discussion forums, etc. 

5. BIOGRAPHIES 
Christopher Brooks is a Research Assistant Professor in the 
School of Information, and Director of Learning Analytics and 
Research in the Office of Digital Education and Innovation, at the 
University of Michigan. His research focuses on using machine 
learning for predictive modeling along with information 
visualization to build novel solutions for understanding student 
learning. 

Craig Thompson is a Ph.D. candidate and Data Analyst at the 
University of Saskatchewan. His doctoral research interests 
include Machine Learning and Image Recognition applied to 
labelling images on the web. As a Data Analyst, Craig is pursuing 
a variety of projects involving Learning Analytics and Data 
Mining with institutional enrolment information, student survey 
responses, and LCMS data. 

Vitomir Kovanovi? is a PhD student and research assistant at 
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 
and a research assistant at the Learning Innovation and Networked 
Knowledge Research Lab at University of Texas, Arlington. 
Vitomir’s research is in the area of Learning Analytics and 
Educational Data Mining focuses on the development of novel 
learning analytics methods based on the trace data collected by 
learning management systems and their use to improve inquiry-
based online education. He authored and co-authored several 
book chapters, conference papers, and journal articles. Vitomir is 
a recipient of two best paper awards (LAK15 and HERDSA15 
conferences) and scholarships by the Serbian ministry of 
Education, Simon Fraser University, and the University of 
Edinburgh. 

                                                                 
3 http://www.solaresearch.org/storm/ 



