
Educational Data Scientists: A Scarce Breed 

Martin Hawksey  
Jisc CETIS 

c/o University of Strathclyde 
16 Richmond Street, Glasgow  

G1 1XQ, UK 

martin.hawksey@strath.ac.uk 

Naomi Jeffery 
The Open University in Scotland 

10 Drumsheugh Gardens, 
Edinburgh 

 EH3 7QJ, UK 

naomi.jeffery@open.ac.uk 

Roy Pea 
H-STAR Institute 

Stanford University 
450 Serra Mall, Building 160, 

Stanford CA 94305-2055, USA 

roypea@stanford.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
The Educational Data Scientist is currently a poorly understood, 
rarely sighted breed. Reports vary: some are known to be largely 
nocturnal, solitary creatures, while others have been reported to 
display highly social behaviour in broad daylight. What are their 
primary habits? How do they see the world? What ecological 
niches do they occupy now, and will predicted seismic shifts 
transform the landscape in their favour? What survival skills do 
they need when running into other breeds? Will their numbers 
grow, and how might they evolve? In this panel, the conference 
will hear and debate not only broad perspectives on the terrain, 
but will have been exposed to some real life specimens, and 
caught glimpses of the future ecosystem.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
J.1 [Administrative Data Processing] Education; K.3.1 
[Computer Uses in Education]  
General Terms 
Measurement, Documentation, Human Factors, Theory  

Keywords 
Learning Analytics; Educational Data Mining; Data Science; 
Educational Data Scientist 

1. INTRODUCTION 
While the learning analytics and educational data mining research 
communities are tackling the question of what data can tell us 

about learners, relatively little attention has been paid, to date, to 
the specific mindset, skillset and career trajectory of the people 
who wield these tools. Within business and government, Data 
Scientists are heralded as the new, scarce breed. A widely cited 
report from McKinsey Global Institute identified a widening 
talent gap in the workforce [1], while Harvard Business Review 
[2] declared Data Scientist to be “sexiest job in the 21st century”! 

The U.S. Department of Education contextualized this talent 
vacuum within the educational ecosystem as follows: 

Interdisciplinary teams of experts in educational data mining, 
learning analytics, and visual analytics should collaborate to 
design and implement research and evidence projects. Higher 
education institutions should create new interdisciplinary 
graduate programs to develop data scientists who embody 
these same areas of expertise. [3] 

Clearly, the LAK community has every interest in shaping this 
mindset and skillset: as MOOCs, conventional courses, and the 
Learning Analytics Summer Institutes1 begin to bear fruit, 
graduates need careers, and research teams will be recruiting back 
from this pool of people as they build industrial track records.  

So, over to our panellists, who bring a wealth of academic and 
hands-on experience to help move this debate forward. 

2. WE NEED MORE EDUCATION DATA 
SCIENTISTS 

I should probably track the number of phone calls and emails I get 
each month from companies that want to hire an education data 
scientist (sometimes called an educational data miner, or learning 
analytics engineer). I get a lot of emails. I try to figure out what 
the company needs (sometimes they don’t know), and recommend 
a colleague, or post-doc, or student. I don’t have enough 
recommendations to go around. I’ve had companies ask me if they 
                                                                    
1  Learning Analytics Summer Institutes: 

http://www.solaresearch.org/events/lasi  

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
LAK '13, April 08 - 12 2013, Leuven, Belgium 
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04...$15.00. 

Simon Buckingham Shum  
Knowledge Media Institute 

The Open University 
Walton Hall 

Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK 

s.buckingham.shum 
@gmail.com 

Ryan S.J.d. Baker 
Teachers College  

Columbia University 
525 W. 120th St., Box 118 
New York, NY 10027, USA 

baker2@exchange.tc. 
columbia.edu 

John T. Behrens 
Center for Digital Data,  

Analytics, & Adaptive Learning 
Pearson 

400 Center Ridge Drive 
Austin, TX 78753 

John.Behrens@pearson.com 
 



can hire someone without experience, and then have me train that 
person.  

We need more graduate programs for education data scientists. A 
couple of graduate programs are already out there that focus on 
this: Carnegie Mellon University, with their new M.S. in Learning 
Science and Engineering; Worcester Polytechnic Institute, with 
their Ph.D. and M.S. in Learning Sciences and Technologies; and 
there are a lot of academic labs that produce graduates trained in 
this area even without an official program.  
One of the tricky things for training a cadre of education data 
scientists – in my opinion – is that “data is not just data”. 
Different kinds of data have different characteristics and 
affordances; different grain-sizes of analysis; different features 
that are key to engineer; different algorithms that just “tend to 
work well”. Less-specialized data science and data mining 
graduate programs can be very good, and if they have good 
education data scientists teaching in them, they’ll naturally 
support the development of this cadre. But where there’s not 
scale, we need resources to support teaching. No one researcher is 
going to know about all the types of data an education data 
scientist needs to know about (I’m very much not a text miner, 
myself – just to give one example). It’s way too early for 
standardized curricula, but sharing resources, creating textbooks, 
and talking to each other will definitely help. Summer institutes 
like the PSLC Summer School and the Learning Analytics 
Summer Institute will help. MOOCs (and hopefully multiple 
competing MOOCs) like the LAK13 MOOC on Learning 
Analytics will help. 
To the future: an education data scientist (or several) in every 
company, well-trained, knowing what has already been tried and 
is awesome, and ready to try new and more awesome things. 
Bio: Ryan Shaun Joazeiro de Baker is the Julius and Rosa 
Sachs Distinguished Lecturer at Teachers College, Columbia 
University. He earned his Ph.D. in Human-Computer Interaction 
from Carnegie Mellon University’s School of Computer Science. 
Dr. Baker was previously Assistant Professor of Psychology and 
the Learning Sciences at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. He 
previously served as the first Technical Director of the Pittsburgh 
Science of Learning Center DataShop, the largest public 
repository for data on the interaction between learners and 
educational software. He researches student engagement, affect, 
meta-cognitive behavior, and robust learning in educational 
software, including in intelligent tutors, simulations, microworlds, 
and serious games, and his lab developed the first automated 
detectors of gaming the system, off-task behavior, and preparation 
for future learning in these contexts. He is currently serving as the 
founding President of the International Educational Data Mining 
Society, and as Associate Editor of the Journal of Educational 
Data Mining. http://www.columbia.edu/~rsb2162   

3. HOW DO YOU BECOME AN 
EDUCATIONAL DATA SCIENTIST? 

In 1999 I was finishing my undergraduate in Structural 
Engineering. Whilst there were moments of interest such as using 
finite element analysis to produce strength visualizations from 
structural simulations, the subject largely left me cold. By 2001 I 
returned to academia to do postgrad in multimedia and interactive 
systems. A notable incident in this period was when the 
programme leader distributed the transcript for the previous 
semester’s grades in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. Data were 
anonymized by using student matriculation numbers. Few 
students appeared to pay attention to his data, I did not. Not only 

was I analyzing where I ranked in the class, I was predicting my 
final grade based on previous performance and all by using 
formula a formatting available in Excel. My curiosity also allowed 
me to decode the student matriculation numbers. By formatting 
the data and pasting it into our student webmail client the ‘check 
names’ feature conveniently reconciled matriculation number to 
student name. Now not only could I see my own performance, I 
could also now look my competition in the eye. I graduated with 
distinction and with a university medal. 

This example underlines a number of the qualities I believe are 
important in becoming an educational data scientist. As noted by 
Stephen Brobst in a talk at Teradata Universe Conference in 2012:   

A data scientist … is someone who: wants to know what the 
question should be; embodies a combination of curiosity, data 
gathering skills, statistical and modelling expertise and strong 
communication skills. … The working environment for a data 
scientist should allow them to self-provision data, rather than 
having to rely on what is formally supported in the 
organisation, to enable them to be inquisitive and creative. [4] 

We all have varying degrees of curiosity, inquisition and 
creativity. The key in my evolution towards educational data 
science has been the professional and personal opportunity (aka 
pushing pixels at 1am) to explore ideas and concepts, doing this 
allowing me to refine my skills in data collection and processing, 
evolve recipes to allow others to taste the sweetness of data 
science, and develop an understanding of my craft.  

Bio:  Martin Hawksey is an advisor at the Centre for Educational 
Technology and Interoperability Standards (CETIS), a national 
advisory and innovation centre funded by JISC, supporting the 
UK Higher and Post-16 Education sectors on educational 
technology and standards. He is a master of Google Sheets and a 
number of his templates are used internationally within education 
and business for collecting and analyzing data. His most notable 
example is the Twitter Archiving Google Spreadsheet (TAGS) 
which archives Twitter search terms for analysis and 
visualization. His current research is primarily around aggregating 
and analyzing secondary data sources from Massive Open Online 
Courses (MOOCs). He is a supporter of open educational 
practices and his work can be followed on his blog, MASHe, at 
http://mashe.hawksey.info  

4. REMEMBER OUR PURPOSE 
How do you define an educational data scientist?  The answer 
varies considerably by post and by practitioner.  The role is also 
rapidly evolving as new software developments chase the 
demands of the research community.  For me, data science is a 
combination of statistics, computer science and information 
design, but as my role connects with so many communities and 
professions, good communication and collaboration skills are 
essential. 
Many definitions specify working with ‘big data’ but I for one 
don’t work exclusively with big data – only when it’s necessary 
and appropriate.  One important basis for working with big data is 
pattern recognition in noisy data, which is a very visual – and, for 
now, primarily human – skill.  As a statistician I am determined 
that in manipulating and visualising data we remain honest and 
realistic, hence shifting focus to smaller, more definite, data 
sources can be both refreshing and an important re-grounding. 

The educational data scientist must dive from Learning Analytics 
(LA) into Educational Data Mining (EDM) and resurface: 
exploring the real world, proposing meaningful measures, 
modelling the data, visualising the output, sharing the technique 



and automating the process.  Sharing new ideas and techniques 
takes enormous confidence and as many education data scientists 
are – like myself – not academics, promoting our work as 
individuals does not always come naturally or easily.  Working 
with academic researchers who are more comfortable on the front 
line can be a relief… as long as credit is shared. 
Keeping track of new LA publications (both formal and informal) 
is extremely important because an understanding of how to 
measure learning must come before any exploratory analysis of 
educational data.  New pedagogies and technologies can render 
traditional analysis methods and conventional wisdom on learner 
behaviour patterns obsolete, hence the educational data scientist 
should always be scanning for new developments and considering 
how they may impact on (and ideally improve) the learner 
experience. 

In the near future I think one focus of educational data science 
will be on developing animated, multi-dimensional techniques for 
mining and visualising data.  Continuing issues will be data 
privacy and ethics, the danger of viewing learners as merely the 
incidental constructs of their own data identity, and the perfidious 
and ultimately ruinous double-standard that ‘your’ data should be 
shared but ‘my’ data must be protected.  An exciting new frontier 
will be developing progressively more meaningful measures of 
learning as we engage with new data and are able to expand our 
quantitative conception of success beyond the course, and into 
individual learner aims for their career and life as a whole.  

Bio: Naomi Jeffery’s academic background is in statistics and 
computer science.  She’s a designer at heart and is working 
towards another degree in design and innovation.  She has more 
ideas than time and more crafts than space. 
http://statisticiana.wordpress.com 

 

5. BE A DATA ANALYST AND A 
PHILOSOPHER/ SCIENTIST 
The science and art of data analysis concerns the process of 
learning from quantitative records of experience. By its very 
nature it exists in relation to people. Tukey & Wilk [4].   

Though a famous and successful statistician, Tukey wanted to 
create a field that dealt with all data, even when it came in such 
poor shape that it was not amenable to statistical analysis.  He 
called it “data analysis” and created the field called “Exploratory 
Data Analysis”.    

My undergraduate degree was in Psychology and Philosophy.  I 
thought if I knew the logic of how we know things (epistemology) 
and understood the human lens through which all perception and 
thought occurs (psychology) I would have the fundamental layers 
of knowing from which to acquire more knowledge. After serving 
as a social worker and studying special education, I sought my 
Ph.D in Educational Psychology with a cognate called 
“Measurement, Statistics & Methodological Studies”.  I would 
approach it as applied epistemology: How do we learn from data?  
When I discovered Tukey’s writings I knew I had found the right 
place.  I conducted psychological studies on perception of 
statistical graphics and wrote about the logical foundations of data 
analysis.  When I wrote such a chapter called “Data and Data 
Analysis” [6] people told me it was a silly title – data wasn’t a 
subject, it’s only a piece of the background to other sciences. 
Philosophy is concerned with understanding meaning and the 
application of logic.  The philosopher asks What do we mean by 
‘data’? What do we mean by ‘analysis’? If data are symbols that 
point to elements in the world, what kind of logic do we need to 
understand that linkage? Like very good scientists, philosophers 
question the obvious.  Such questioning may not be essential for 
what you do today, but it may open the door to do new ways of 
thinking you never imagined.    

The successful learning analyst will avoid two common errors: 
Failure to understand the context and failure to become intimately 
familiar with the data.  The first error is caused by lack of 
contextual knowledge. Studying the learning sciences, education, 
and related disciplines will help.  The second is error is caused by 
a substitution of complex statistical or computational models for 
detailed mental models.  We only build computational models or 
display to help our mental models.  Question the assumptions of 
your work deeply. It is important that analysts understand their 
work is about “revelation” or “unveiling” the reality of the world.  
It is a special (at times prophetic) role in society and should be 
taken very seriously. 

Do not think of data science as a set of techniques but as a 
collection of viewpoints (epistemic positions) and habits of mind.  
To undertake good visualization we need to know the techniques 
of data display, but also the psychology of perception, the 
anthropology of semiotics, the mathematics of fluctuation and the 
philosophy and art of aesthetic engagement. We will always need 
good technical analysts, but we need them to be (or at least 
understand) scientists, philosophers & artists as well. 

Bio: John Behrens is Vice President and leader of the Center for 
Digital Data, Analytics, and Adaptive Learning at Pearson.  He 
brings cognitive, statistical, computational and philosophical 
lenses to designing, deploying and analyzing data-intensive 
learning systems including instructional, assessment, and game 
environments.   He continues to write and speak about data and 
data analysis and the implications of the digital revolution for 
methodology. He is in love with data and the worlds they reflect.  
Previously, John led product research and development in the 
Cisco Networking Academies. Serving 10,000 schools in 160 
countries, John oversaw the first large scale use of Evidence 
Centered Design to drive the integrated use of curriculum, 
simulations, and gaming for on-line instruction and assessment.  
His work in Cisco certifications made simulation based 
assessment standard practice in the IT certification exam industry.  
Prior to Cisco, John was a tenured associate professor of 
Psychology in Education at Arizona State University. 
http://researchnetwork.pearson.com/digital-data-analytics-and-
adaptive-learning  



6.   WHAT ARE KEY COMPETENCY 
DOMAINS FOR THE EDUCATION 
DATA SCIENTIST? 

When I was responsible for designing and launching the first 
Learning Sciences doctoral program in the world in 1992 at 
Northwestern University with my colleagues in education, 
psychology, and computer science, we put considerable thought 
into how to frame the areas of scholarship and inquiry that our 
students needed to master to make the advances we felt the 
opportunities warranted. 

What we developed at the time was a tripartite conceptualization 
of the Learning Sciences: ‘Cognition’ – constructing scientific 
models of the structures and processes of learning and teaching by 
which organized knowledge, skills and understanding are 
acquired; ‘Environments’ [now ‘Context’] – examining the social, 
organizational and cultural dynamics of learning and teaching 
situations, including schools and out-of-school settings, such as 
homes, museums and corporations; and ‘Architectures’ [now 
‘Design’] – building environments for learning and teaching, 
incorporating multimedia, artificial intelligence, computer 
networks and innovative curriculum and classroom activity 
structures. Each of our students tended to focus on going deep in 
one of these to make their contributions, but we insisted that they 
learn enough about the others to team productively. We also 
recognized that in principle and in practice, these distinctions 
between Cognition, Context and Design were as much about 
figure and ground than about hard and fast: embodied minds 
interact and learn in contexts involving designed socio-technical 
tools. And twenty years on, these distinctions are becoming even 
more indissociable in an increasingly hyperconnected world. 

These three domains of competencies were prescient framings. 
Northwestern University revisited this scheme twenty years later 
and decided after critical reflection to keep to it, since it had 
served its graduates, faculty, and building the field of Learning 
Sciences well. At Stanford, we launched our Learning Sciences 
and Technology Design program in 2001. Today there are 40 or 
so postgraduate degree programs around the world in the Learning 
Sciences, and the 2nd edition of the Cambridge Handbook of the 
Learning Sciences, first published in 2006, is in the works. There 
is a growing International Society for the Learning Sciences 
(ISLS.org), and two archival journals that are among the highest 
impact journals in the education field: The Journal of the 
Learning Sciences, and the International Journal of Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning.  
What is the relevancy of this history for what an education data 
scientist needs to know and be able to do?  I argue that the 
education data scientist, too, needs to have an understanding of 
the cognitive, contextual and design aspects of the transactions 
that generate educational data and the interdisciplinary sciences 
that will contribute to an understanding of it – if he or she is to ask 
generative research questions that will advance the sciences and 
practices of education and learning. 

What’s new with education data science? A great deal: The 
foundational roles of developments in statistical computing for 
data analytics; the centrality of state-of-the-art interactive data 
visualization for exploratory data analysis; the vital roles of 
machine learning; more powerful and distributed computing 
architectures that enable sense-making and prediction with big 
data; deeper understanding of the links between types of research 
questions, education data types, and effective LA and EDM 
methodologies to suite the questions and data; greater need than 

ever for critical questioning of assumptions at every level, and for 
balancing learning data openness and transparency with ethical 
considerations. The technical and mathematical wizardry 
underlying these advances still needs theory and science from the 
Cognition, Context and Design domains. For example, the social 
and environmental contexts of technology-mediated learning need 
to be “sensed” and become part of our multimodal learning 
analytics agenda, as they are central to the environments which 
learners are experiencing when educational data is collected.  In 
short, an education data scientist will have to be an active listener 
and open collaborator because no one will know and be able to do 
everything that will produce the highest quality work.  

We should unite in a clarion call for universities, governments, 
philanthropists, and industry to all contribute to accelerating the 
field of education data science, and work collectively to attract the 
best minds of our generation to tackling problems and providing 
compelling solutions that would enable global personalized 
learning for all. 

Bio. At Stanford University Roy Pea serves as David Jacks 
Professor of Education and the Learning Sciences (and, by 
courtesy, Computer Science), co-founder and Director of the H-
STAR Institute (Human Sciences and Technologies Advanced 
Research), and founder and Director of the PhD program in 
Learning Sciences and Technology Design. He was on the 
founding board of ISLS and served as President, 2004-2005. His 
work in the learning sciences focuses on advancing theories, 
findings, tools, practices and interdisciplinary field-building for 
technology-enhanced learning of complex domains. He co-leads 
the “LIFE Center” (http://life-slc.org) whose studies seek to 
inform better bridging of the sciences of learning for informal and 
formal environments. He has been long been inspired by the 
Engelbartian quest for augmenting human intellect and 
performance by co-evolving human-computer systems, and 
learning analytics seems poised as a breakthrough area toward 
that long-term vision. Recently, he joined with Stanford's Vice 
Provost for Online Learning, John Mitchell, to serve as faculty co-
director of an interdisciplinary student-initiated Lytics Lab, 
devoted to advancing learning analytics science, theory and tools, 
with special attention to improving MOOCs. 
http://www.stanford.edu/~roypea  

6. REFERENCES 
1. Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, Competition, 

and Productivity. McKinsey Global Institute. 
http://bit.ly/McKinseyBigDataReport   

2. Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century. Harvard 
Business Review Magazine: http://hbr.org/2012/10/data-
scientist-the-sexiest-job-of-the-21st-century/ar/1 

3. Expanding Evidence Approaches for Learning in a Digital 
World. Office of Educ. Technology, U.S. Dept. Education: 
http://www.ed.gov/edblogs/technology/evidence-framework 

4. Cooper, C.: Analytics and Big Data - Reflections from the 
Teradata Universe Conference 2012. Blog post (Apr. 27, 
2012): http://bit.ly/CooperTeradataBlog  

5. Tukey, J. W. and Wilk, M. B. (1966). Data analysis and 
statistics: An expository overview. AFIPS Conf. Proc. 1966 
Fall Joint Comp. Conf. 29, pp. 695–709 

6. Behrens, J. T., & Smith, M. L. (1996).  Data and data 
analysis. In D. C. Berliner, & R. C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook 
of Educational Psychology, pp. 945-989.  New York: 
MacMillan. 



