
1st International Workshop on Learning Analytics and 
Linked Data 

Hendrik Drachsler 
Open University of the Netherlands 

Valkenburgerweg 177 
6419AT Heerlen, Netherlands 

+31 45 576-21-74 

hendrik.drachsler@ou.nl 

Stefan Dietze 
L3S Research Centre 

Appelstraße 9A 
30167 Hannover, Germany 

+49 511 762-17-705 

dietze@l3s.de 

Wolfgang Greller 
Open University of the Netherlands 

Valkenburgerweg 177 
6419AT Heerlen, Netherlands 

+31 45 576-21-74 

wolfgang.greller@ou.nl 

D’Aquin, Mathieu; The Open University, UK; m.daquin@open.ac.uk 
Jovanovic, Jelena; University of Belgrade, Serbia; jeljov@gmail.com 

Pardo, Abelardo; University of Madrid, Spain; abel@it.uc3m.es 
Reinhardt, Wolfgang, University of Paderborn, Germany; wolle@upb.de 

Verbert, Katrien; K.U.Leuven, Belgium; katrien.verbert@gmail.com

ABSTRACT 
The main objective of the 1st International Workshop on Learning 
Analytics and Linked Data (#LALD2012) is to connect the 
research efforts on Linked Data and Learning Analytics in order 
to create visionary ideas and foster synergies between the two 
young research fields. Therefore, the workshop will collect, 
explore, and present datasets, technologies and applications for 
Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL) to discuss Learning 
Analytics approaches that make use of educational data or Linked 
Data sources. During the workshop, an overview of available 
educational datasets and related initiatives will be given. The 
participants will have the opportunity to present their own 
research with respect to educational datasets, technologies and 
applications and discuss major challenges to collect, reuse, and 
share these datasets.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
E.1 [Data Structures] Distributed data structures; E.2 [Data 

Storage Representations] Linked representations; J.1 

[Administrative Data Processing] Education; H.1.1 

[Information Systems] Models and principles, Systems and 

Information Theory; J.4 [Social and behavioural sciences]. 

General Terms 
Algorithms, Measurement, Design, Standardization, Human 
Factors, Theory, Legal Aspects. 

Keywords 
Linked data, Learning analytics, Educational datasets, privacy, 
ethics. 

1. WORKSHOP BACKGROUND 
In Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL), a multitude of datasets 
exists that offer new opportunities for teaching and learning. The 
available datasets can be roughly distinguished between (a) Open 

Web data and (b) Personal Learning data originating from 
different learning environments. 

Open Web data covers educational data publicly available on the 
Web, such as Linked Open Data (LOD) published by institutions 
about their courses and other resources; examples include (but are 
not limited to), e.g. The Open University (UK), the National 
Research Council (CNR, Italy), Southampton University (UK), or 
the mEducator Linked Educational Resources. It also includes the 
emergence of Linked Data based metadata schemas and TEL-
related datasets. The main driver for the adoption of the LOD 
approach in education is the enrichment of the learning content 
and the learning experience by making use of various connected 
data sources. 

Personal Learning data from different learning environments 
originate from tracking learners’ interactions with different tools 
and resources. The main driver for analyzing these data is the 
vision of personalized learning that offers potential to create more 
effective learning experiences through new possibilities for the 
prediction and reflection of individual learning processes. 

To this end, Learning Analytics can be seen as an approach, 
which brings together two different views: (i) the external view 
on publicly available Web data and (ii) an internal view on 
personal learner data, e.g. data about individual learning activities 
and histories. Learning Analytics aims at combining these two in 
a smart and innovative way in order to enable advanced 
educational services, such as recommendation of suitable learning 
resources to individual learners.  

To enable synergies and alignment of those efforts, communities 
like the Special Interest Group (SIG) dataTEL of the European 
Association of Technology Enhanced Learning (EATEL) and the 
LinkedEducation.org open platform, emerged very recently. The 
SIG dataTEL aims at advancing data-driven TEL research and to 
develop a body of knowledge about personalization derived from 
analyzing and visualizing personal data sourced from learning 
environments. Connecting information extracted from such 
personal tracking data with the Web of (Linked Open) Data offers 
interesting perspectives to enrich learning processes with suitable 
resources available on the Web. 

The main objective of the LALD workshop is to connect the 
research efforts on Linked Data and Learning Analytics to create 
visionary ideas about how the synergy of a Web of Data and 

 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
LAK’12, 29 April – 2 May 2012, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1111-3/12/04…$10.00. 

9



Learning Analytics can transform and support TEL processes and 
applications. Therefore, the workshop will explore, collect and 
review datasets for TEL to discuss Learning Analytics 
approaches, which make use of the Web of Data. During the 
workshop, an overview of available educational datasets will be 
given. The participants will have the opportunity to present their 
own datasets or dataset descriptions, show their data products and 
tools, and discuss major challenges to collect, use and share 
educational datasets and their products. Different promising 
initiatives and solutions for the above mentioned challenges will 
be presented. 

2. WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES 
The main objective of the LALD workshop is to foster a research 
network around educational data issues and Learning Analytics. 
The workshop will contribute to the following main challenges of 
the SIG dataTEL and the Linked Education platform: 

1. Educational Datasets: 

• Evaluating, promoting, creating and clustering of educational 
datasets, schemas and vocabularies. 

• Feasibility of standardization of educational datasets to enable 
exchange and interoperability. 

• Facilitating the sharing of educational datasets among TEL 
researchers in general, and researchers in the Learning 
Analytics field, in particular.  

2. Data Technologies: 

• What technologies are available for the exploration of 
educational datasets, i.e., for filtering, interlinking, exposing, 
adapting, converting and visualizing educational datasets? 

• What are the real-world applications that show a measureable 
impact of Learning Analytics and thus successfully promote 
the field to target groups? 

• Which tools are available to use and exploit educational 
Linked Open Data? 

• Which innovative TEL applications make large-scale use of 
the available open Web data? 

3. Evaluation of Technologies and Datasets: 

• Fostering standardized evaluation methods for Learning 
Analytics. 

• Discuss the need of data competitions similar to TREC and 
CLEF to compare TEL research and guide people in 
evaluating and comparing their results. 

4. Privacy and Ethics: 

• Contributing to policies on ethical implications of using the 
educational data for learning analytics (privacy and legal 
protection rights) 

• Suggesting guidelines for the anonymization and sharing of 
educational data for Learning Analytics research.  

3. WORKSHOP FACILITATORS 
The workshop will be organized jointly by the Linked Education 
initiative (http://linkededucation.org) and the SIG dataTEL 
(http://bit.ly/datatel) of EATEL. Both, the Linked Education and 
the SIG dataTEL aim at advancing data-driven research in TEL. 
The main goals are to promote the re-use of public Web data, to 

foster the cooperation between different Learning Analytics 
research units and to act as a representative to other relevant 
communities. 

Both initiatives can look back on an annual workshop series at 
different conferences: 

• RecSysTEL workshop with the 1st dataTEL marketplace 
jointly at the EC-TEL and the ACM Recommender Systems 
conference in Barcelona (http://bit.ly/datatel10).  

• dataTEL11 at the 3rd  Alpine Rendezvous conference in La 
Clusaz, France (http://bit.ly/datatel_arv11).  

• Linked Learning workshop at the 8th Extended Semantic Web 
Conference (http://purl.org/linkedlearning). 

4. REFERENCES 
[1] Dietze, S., Gugliotta, A., Domingue, J., (2008). Supporting 

Interoperability and Context-Awareness in E-Learning 
through Situation-driven Learning Processes. Special Issue 
on Web-based Learning of International Journal of Distance 
Education Technologies (JDET), 2008.  

[2] Dietze, S., d’Aquin, M., Gaševi?, D., Sicilia, M-A. (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on eLearning 
Approaches for the Linked Data Age held at the 8th 
Extended Semantic Web Conference, ESWC 2011, CEUR 
Vol. 717, 2011.  

[3] Drachsler, H., Bogers, T., Vuorikari, R., Verbert, K., Duval, 
E., Manouselis, N., Beham, G., Lindstaedt, S., Stern, H., 
Friedrich, M., Wolpers, M. (2010). Issues and 
Considerations regarding Sharable Data Sets for 
Recommender Systems in Technology Enhanced Learning. 
Elsevier Procedia Computer Science, 1, 2, pp. 2849 - 2858. 

[4] Dovrolis, N., Stefanut, T., Dietze, S., Yu, H.Q., Valentine, C. 
and Kaldoudi, E., Semantic Annotation and Linking of 
Medical Educational Resources, 5th European Conference of 
the International Federation for Medical and Biological 
Engineering (IFMBE MBEC), Budapest, 2011. 

[5] Kaldoudi, E., Dovrolis, N., Dietze, S., Information 
Organization on the Internet based on Heterogeneous Social 
Networks, 29th ACM International Conference on Design of 
Communication (ACM SIGDOC’11), Pisa, 2011.  

[6] Manouselis, N., Drachsler, H., Vuorikari, R., Hummel, H. 
and Koper, R. (2010). Recommender Systems in Technology 
Enhanced Learning. In Kantor, P.B.; Ricci, F.; Rokach, L.; 
Shapira, B. (Eds.) 1st Recommender Systems Handbook, 
Berlin: Springer (2011). 

[7] Mitsopoulou, E., Taibi, D., Giordano, D., Dietze, S., Yu, H. 
Q., Bamidis, P., Bratsas, C., Woodham, L., Connecting 
Medical Educational Resources to the Linked Data Cloud: 
the mEducator RDF Schema, Store and API, Proceedings of 
Linked Learning 2011: the 1st International Workshop on 
eLearning Approaches for the Linked Data Age, CEUR-Vol 
717, 2011. 

[8] Verbert, K., Drachsler, H., Manouselis, N., Wolpers, M., 
Vuorikari, R., & Duval, E. (2011). Dataset-driven Research 
for Improving Recommender Systems for Learning. 1st 
International Conference Learning Analytics & Knowledge. 
February, 27 - March, 1, 2011, Banff, Alberta, Canada. 

10





