
VISLA: Visual Aspects of Learning Analytics

Erik Duval
Dept. Comp. Sc., KU Leuven

Celestijnenlaan 200A
B3000 Leuven, B

erik.duval@cs.kuleuven.be

Katrien Verbert
Dept. Comp. Sc., KU Leuven

Celestijnenlaan 200A
B3000 Leuven, B

katrien.verbert@cs.kuleuven.be

Joris Klerkx
Dept. Comp. Sc., KU Leuven

Celestijnenlaan 200A
B3000 Leuven, B

joris.klerkx@cs.kuleuven.be
Martin Wolpers

Fraunhofer FIT
Schloss Birlinghoven

53754 Sank Augustin, D
martin.wolpers@fit.fraunhofer.de

Abelardo Pardo
El & Inf Eng, Univ. Sydney

NSW
2006, A

abelardo.pardo@sydney.edu.au

Sten Govaerts
School of Eng, EPFL

Station 9
CH-1015 Lausanne, CH

sten.govaerts@epfl.ch
Denis Gillet

School of Eng, EPFL
Station 9

CH-1015 Lausanne, CH
denis.gillet@epfl.ch

Xavier Ochoa
ESPOL, Gustavo Galindo
KM 30.5 Via Perimetral

Guayaquil, EC
xavier@cti.espol.edu

Denis Parra
Dept. Computer Science

Pontificia Univ. Catolica Chile
Santiago, CL

dparra@ing.puc.cl

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we briefly describe the goal and activities of
the LAK15 workshop on Visual Aspects of Learning analyt-
ics.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Mul-
timedia Information Systems, User Interfaces, Group and
Organization Interfaces

General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors

Keywords
learning analytics, visual analytics, information visualisa-
tion

1. WORKSHOP GOALS
The use of visualisation techniques for learning is not new.

In a learning analytics context, the application of infor-
mation visualisation techniques can help both teachers and
learners to explore and understand relevant user traces that
are collected in various (online) environments. Typical ap-
plications include dashboards [?] or tabletop visualisations
that support collaborative learning [?]. Thus, such tech-
niques can improve (human) learning.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.

LAK ’15 Mar 16 - 20 2015, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
ACM 978-1-4503-3417-4/15/03.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723643.

The goal of this workshop is to build a strong research ca-
pacity around visual approaches to learning analytics. The
longer term goal is to improve the quality of learning ana-
lytics research that relies on information visualisation tech-
niques.

2. ACTIVITIES
Authors were invited to submit original unpublished work.

The following types of contributions were possible:

• Short papers (3-5 pages) that state the position of the
authors within the scope of the workshop and describe
solution concepts, prototypes and work in progress.

• Full papers: (8-12 pages) that describe mature work,
including evaluation.

Each contribution to the workshop was asked to further-
more explicitly address the ollowing items:

1. What kind of data is being visualised? What tools
were used to clean up the data (if any)?

2. For whom is it intended? This could be the learner,
teacher, manager, researcher, etc.

3. How is data visualised? Which interaction techniques
are applied? What tools, libraries, data formats, etc.
are used? Describe the workflows and recipes used to
develop the visualisation?

4. Why are the visual approaches applied (i.e. rationale
behind the application of a visualisation)?

5. How has the approach been evaluated or how could it
be evaluated?

6. What were the encountered problems and pitfalls dur-
ing the visualisation process?

394



We received 7 short papers and 2 long papers. At the time
of writing, the review process is proceeding.

Topics covered in the submissions illustrate the variety
of approaches in the domain: tablet visualisations for self-
regulated learning, tabletop visualisations for enquiry based
learning, visualisations of student responses to short answer
questions, visualisations of tag clusters for learning reposi-
tories, visualisations of competence graphs, the visualisation
of uncertainty in predictions of course failure, the visualisa-
tion of Learning Management System logs, visualisation of
collaborative writing in education, and visual analytics for
discussion fora on learning how to program...

During our 1-day workshop, we aim to facilitate an inter-
active and engaging event where we want to avoid death by
powerpoint by promoting discussion activities over presenta-
tions. In the first half of the workshop, we will therefore ask
participants to shortly present the work of another submis-
sion and to relate it back to their own work. Facilitators may
allocate challengers per presentation to move the discussion
around common themes and differences in approaches.

During the second half of the workshop, we will invite the
participants to share their tools, workflows and recipes in
a hands on discussion session so that they can benefit from
each others’ knowledge, apply their visual approaches on
either their own dataset or on the dataset that we provide.

Finally, we will move the discussion to the final topic of
the workshop, which is the development of the equivalent
of the VAST challenge for learning [?], which will be linked
back with the LAK14 and LAK15 data challenge [?]. To get
this discussion going, we will invite a keynote speaker with
direct experience in VAST.

As [?] mentions:

The annual Visual Analytics Science and Tech-
nology (VAST) challenge provides Visual Ana-
lytics researchers, developers, and designers an
opportunity to apply their best tools and tech-
niques against invented problems that include a
realistic scenario, data, tasks, and questions to
be answered. Submissions are processed much
like conference papers, contestants are provided
reviewer feedback, and excellence is recognized
with awards. A day-long VAST Challenge work-
shop takes place each year at the IEEE VAST
conference to share results and recognize out-
standing submissions.

3. RELATED WORKSHOPS
Three related editions of our workshop around the theme

of applying visual approaches in TEL and in learning ana-
lytics were held at EC-TEL 2011 (https://sites.google.
com/site/advtel2011/), at Learning Analytics Summer In-
stitute (LASI14) in Cambridge, MA, USA (http://solaresearch.
org/conferences/lasi/lasi2014/) and at the JTEL sum-
mer school 2013 (http://www.prolearn-academy.org/Events/
summer-school-2013).

4. CONCLUSION
We believe that an initiative similar to VAST for learning

analytics data sets would help to build up research capacity
around visual aspects of learning analytics.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the review efforts of our Pro-

gram Committee: Michael Derntl (D), Pedro J. Munoz Merino
(E), Alexandra Cristea (UK), Ulrich Hoppe (D), Eelco Herder
(D), Patrick Jermann (CH), Ralf Klamma (D), Till Nagel
(D), Lars Bollen (NL), Dragan Gasevic (CA), Sharon Hsiao
(USA), Judy Kay (AU), Dietrich Albert (A), Maria Jesus
Rodriguez Triana (CH).

6. REFERENCES
[1] K. Cook, G. Grinstein, and M. Whiting. The VAST

challenge: history, scope, and outcomes: An
introduction to the special issue. Information
Visualization, 13(4):301–312, 2014.

[2] H. Drachsler, S. Dietze, E. Herder, M. d’Aquin, and
D. Taibi. The learning analytics & knowledge (LAK)
data challenge 2014. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Learning Analytics And
Knowledge, LAK ’14, pages 289–290, New York, NY,
USA, 2014. ACM.

[3] R. Martinez-Maldonado, Y. Dimitriadis,
A. Martinez-Mone?s, J. Kay, and K. Yacef. Capturing
and analyzing verbal and physical collaborative
learning interactions at an enriched interactive
tabletop. International Journal of Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning, 8(4):455–485, 2013.

[4] K. Verbert, S. Govaerts, E. Duval, J. Santos, F. Assche,
G. Parra, and J. Klerkx. Learning dashboards: an
overview and future research opportunities. Personal
and Ubiquitous Computing, 18(6):1499–1514, 2014.

395

https://sites.google.com/site/advtel2011/
https://sites.google.com/site/advtel2011/
http://solaresearch.org/conferences/lasi/lasi2014/
http://solaresearch.org/conferences/lasi/lasi2014/
http://www.prolearn- academy.org/Events/summer-school-2013
http://www.prolearn- academy.org/Events/summer-school-2013




