
[LISA] Learning Analytics for Sensor-Based Adaptive
Learning

Albrecht Fortenbacher
HTW Berlin

Wilhelminenhofstr. 75A
12459 Berlin, Germany
forte@htw-berlin.de

Niels Pinkwart
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin

Rudower Chaussee 25
12489 Berlin, Germany

pinkwart@hu-berlin.de

Haeseon Yun
HTW Berlin

Wilhelminenhofstr. 75A
12459 Berlin, Germany
yun@htw-berlin.de

ABSTRACT
This paper reports on research conducted in a project named
LISA which aims at supporting learners through learner-
centered learning analytics using physiological sensor data
as well as environmental sensors. We present the concept
and a prototypical realization of a mobile sensor device used
in LISA.

CCS Concepts
•Applied Computing ? Education;

Keywords
Adaptive learning; learner awareness; self-regulated learn-
ing; sensor based learning; learner-centric learning analytics

1. INTRODUCTION
LISA is a research project funded by the German govern-

ment aimed at improving learner support through the use
of sensor data. Solutions for sensor-based adaptive learn-
ing developed within the LISA project will be integrated
into learning environments and products of three enterprise
project partners.

The core idea of LISA is to bring together learner-centric
learning analytics methods with sensor data indicating the
emotional state of a learner. While (we believe) this is a
very promising approach, it poses a wide range of challeng-
ing research questions: what sensors are adequate for this
kind of learning support at all, how reliable are the signals,
what learning indicators can be derived from them, what ed-
ucational models and learning analytics methods are needed
if personal sensor data are available, what forms of human-
computer interfaces are appropriate, and how can we deal
with ethical, legal and social issues when using (or abusing)
sensor data? In the following sections, we briefly describe
some of the related concepts, achievements and open ques-
tions in LISA, regarding user-centric learning analytics and
a mobile sensor device as a learning companion.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

LAK ’17 March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada
c© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).

ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03.

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029476

2. PRINCIPLES OF SENSOR-BASED ADAP-
TIVE LEARNING

Affective factors including learners’ motivation, stress or
flow have been investigated in various educational psychol-
ogy studies, linking these factors to measurable variables
like clicks, postings, messages, views, writes and likes in on-
line learning environments. There is also evidence on the
correlation between certain types of sensor data (e.g. heart
rate), and higher-level states of persons that are relevant for
learning (e.g., anxiety).

These findings build the foundation for the educational
approach in the LISA research project. Our approach re-
lies on gathering sensor data about learners as they engage
in their activities, storing and processing this data, com-
bined with data coming from other relevant sources such
as log data from the learning technology in use. During
this process, data sovereignty and privacy are key issues to
consider, given the potentially sensitive nature of the data
(e.g., biological signals might not only be relevant for learn-
ing support but may also reveal health information). The
data - in an analyzed form that is manageable and under-
standable for the users - will be fed back to the learners (and
not primarily to the teachers, as in many other learning an-
alytics applications) in order to help them self-regulate their
learning processes [3]. Feedback can be given through visu-
alization of a learning-related state (based on sensor data),
through direct feedback messages (“take a break - you seem
to be stressed”), or through an adaptive modification of the
learning environment, e.g. increase or decrease of a task’s
difficulty.

3. PROTOTYPE OF A SENSOR DEVICE FOR
LEARNING SUPPORT

Sensors have immense potential in a learning context.
They can provide information related to a learning space
(e.g. air quality) or to a learner (e.g. emotional state).
Wearable sensors such as electro- dermal activity sensors
(EDA) and electro-cardiogram sensors (ECG) can provide
physiological data which can be presented to the learner to
support self reflection in learning.

In the first LISA prototype for a wearable sensor device,
both EDA and ECG sensors (manufactured by Bitalino)
were integrated with an Arduino microcontroller as shown
in Figure 1, which later was replaced by a Nucleo micro-
controller unit. EDA sensors have been utilized in previous
studies to investigate emotions such as anger, anxiety, fear,
sadness, amusement, happiness, pleasure and relief [8]. In



combination with EDA sensors, ECG sensors can be used to
describe an emotional state [9].

Figure 1: Wearable
Prototype with EDA
and ECG Sensors.

In this prototype, the EDA
signal was detected via two
electrodes on two fingers, and
ECG was detected at the top
left part of a chest right be-
low a collarbone, via two elec-
trodes. The ECG and EDA
signals provide a good op-
portunity to investigate the
physiological changes of learn-
ers during a learning session.
As explored in [7], the EDA
signal differs when a learner
views an action movie com-
pared to being in a relaxed
stage. Also the heart rate
and its variability detected by
ECG are associated with emo-
tions and cognition [4].

With this prototype, fur-
ther studies with emotional tasks and cognitive tasks are
scheduled, relating physiological data to learning states. To
support self-regulated learning, we plan to experiment with
different forms of mirroring back the sensor data to learn-
ers. This includes raw forms as well as aggregated forms
(constructed using learning analytics methods), employing
visualizations such as bar charts, pie charts, histograms,
radar plots, scatter plots, tables, timelines, networks, tag
or word clouds, skill meters, concept maps and hierarchical
tree structures [2].

4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
One of the core components of LISA is a mobile learning

companion. It consists of a (wearable) sensor device to-
gether with a mobile device (SmartMonitor). Both devices
communicate via a BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) channel.

Separating the learning companion into two components,
the LISA concept can support different types of sensor data
- e.g. body temperature or EEG data, but also facial ex-
pressions or eye movements derived from a camera - which
might be helpful in different learning environments.

The SmartMonitor should be a non-invasive device in that
it interacts with a learner without distracting from learn-
ing. Open questions such as generality and portability to
different learning contexts, or natural interaction between
learning companion and learner [6] will be explored as part
of the LISA project.

The learning companion has an important function with
regard to ethical implications of the use (and abuse) of per-
sonal sensor data: it must give full control over personal
sensor data to the learner. Aggregation and transmission of
sensor data must be transparent (and understandable) for
the users, who should also be able to opt out from the usage
of sensor data for learning support. Based on the analysis
of sensor data, the learning companion might display (alert)
messages on the screen, as well as explicit feedback messages
from a learning analytics component.

The LISA backend contains a repository of educational
data, stemming from learning tools as well as from the learn-
ing companion. It communicates with both the SmartMoni-
tor and any learning application via xAPI [1]. Extensions to

the xAPI standard allow to implement a data privacy policy.
Together with data privacy settings in the Smart Monitor,
this gives the control over personal and educational data
back to the user, which allows for a powerful and transpar-
ent ELSI concept for LISA [5].

5. OUTLOOK
The enrichment of educational technology with personal

sensor data, combining learning activities with indicators
for emotional or cognitive states, is very promising, but also
challenging with respect to many issues such as educational
designs, privacy, and appropriate learner-centric learning an-
alytics methods. In the course of the LISA project, our
approaches for sensor-based adaptive learning will be inte-
grated and evaluated in the context of different real-world
learning scenarios.

6. REFERENCES
[1] A. Bakharia, K. Kitto, A. Pardo, D. Gas?evic?, and

S. Dawson. Recipe for Success - Lessons Learnt from
Using xAPI within the Connected Learning Analytics
Toolkit. In Sixth International Conference on Learning
Analytics & Knowledge, pages 378–382, 2016.

[2] S. Bull, B. Ginon, B. Clelia, and M. Johnson.
Introduction of Learning Visualisations and
Metacognitive Support in a Persuadable Open Learner
Model. In Sixth International Conference on Learning
Analytics & Knowledge, pages 30–39. ACM, 2016.

[3] D. L. Butler and P. H. Winne. Feedback and
self-regulated learning: A theoretical synthesis. Review
of Educational Research Fall, 65(3):245–281, 1995.

[4] G. Chanel and C. Mu?hl. Connecting brains and bodies:
Applying physiological computing to support social
interaction. Interacting with Computers, 27(5):534–550,
2015.

[5] H. Drachsler and W. Greller. Privacy and Learning
Analytics - a DELICATE issue. A Checklist for Trusted
Learning Analytics. Accepted for 6th International
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge,
Edinburgh, UK, April 25-29 2016., 2016.

[6] B. Goodman, F. Linton, and R. Gaimari. Encouraging
Student Reflection and Articulation Using a Learning
Companion: A Commentary. International Artificial
Intelligence in Education Society 2015, 26:476–488,
2015.

[7] C. Kappeler-Setz, F. Gravenhorst, J. Schumm,
B. Arnrich, and G. Tro?ster. Towards long term
monitoring of electrodermal activity in daily life. Pers
Ubiquit Comput, 17:261–271, 2013.

[8] S. D. Kreibig. Autonomic nervous system activity in
emotion: a review. Biological psychology, 84(3):394–421,
jul 2010.

[9] J. Schneider, D. Bo?rner, P. Van Rosmalen, and
M. Specht. Augmenting the senses: A review on
sensor-based learning support. Sensors (Switzerland),
15(2):4097–4133, 2015.



