
Demonstration of the Unizin Sentiment Visualizer 
J D Freeman 

Unizin 
720 Brazos Street, Suite 810  

Austin, TX, USA 
jd.freeman@unizin.org

ABSTRACT 
While much promise has been demonstrated in the learning 
analytics field with sentiment analysis, the analyses are typically 
post hoc. The Unizin Sentiment Visualizer demonstrates that the 
application of sentiment analysis in real-time provides a powerful 
new tool to support students in complex learning environments. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
J.7 Computers in Other Systems (C.3)  - Real time;  K.3.1 
Computer Uses in Education - Computer-assisted instruction 
(CAI); I.2.7 Natural Language Processing - Text analysis 

General Terms 
Algorithms, Measurement 

Keywords 
Unizin, learning analytics, student, intervention, sentiment 
analysis, discussion, natural language processing, text mining, real 
time, real-time 

1. INTRODUCTION 
As Simon Knight and Karen Littleton recently explained in the 
Journal of Learning Analytics [1], there is strong demand for 
discourse analysis. 
 
In this demonstration, Unizin will show an application where the 
Canvas Live Events feed by Instructure is ingested, and content 
from student contributions to discussion forums is scored for 
sentiment, frustration, grammatical uncertainty (as a subset of 
linguistic modality), and inquisition. The Live Events feed [2], is 
compliant with the Caliper Analytics framework, as maintained by 
the IMS Global Learning Consortium [3]. 
 
Charted results are available as a selectable data table (Figure 1). 
Selectable fields include Course, Term, Student, Alert Status, 
Thread, and Post. 

 
Figure 1: Data Table with User Selection Menu. 

 
The results will also be displayed in an interactive scatterplot, 
where each dot represents the average sentiment of a student’s 
contributions to any given discussion thread. Students in potential 
need of intervention will be detected and highlighted in an 
alternative color. The detection threshold can be customized, and 
is shown as one standard deviation of negative sentiment below 
the average sentiment of the entire class for the same thread.  
 
A tooltip (Figure 2) will appear when the cursor hovers over a 
dot, displaying the identifiers for both the student and the thread, 
as well as a sentiment reading. While this demonstration employs 
anonymized synthetic data for FERPA compliance, the instructor 
would see student names. 

 

 
Figure 2: Tooltip on Sentiment Analysis Datum Representing 
the Average Sentiment Expressed by an Individual Student 

throughout a Discussion Thread, Plotted Relative to the 
Average Sentiment for the Entire Class. 

 
The results for frustration, uncertainty, and inquisition will be 
displayed in a three-dimensional dot cloud as depicted in Figure 
3. The instructor will be able to zoom and spin perspective around 
this dot cloud. The detection threshold can be those outliers 
falling beyond the farthest boundary of the concentration zone of 
a cluster (shown as shaded in Figure 3) or a trigger limit on the 
Euclidean distance of each dot from origin. 
 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other 
uses, contact the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883903 

 

http://epress.lib.uts.edu.au/journals/index.php/JLA/article/view/4043/4841
http://canvas.beta.instructure.com/doc/api/file.live_events.html
http://www.imsglobal.org/activity/caliperram


 
Figure 3: Interactive 3D Clustering of Student Discussion 

Contributions by Uncertainty, Frustration, and Inquisition.  
 

Reports of those students contributing to the current thread and in 
potential need of intervention are interactively prepared on a 
different tab, showing the text in question for review. Among 
others, the application finds cases where students are pleading for 
help (Figure 4). This report can be printed directly from the 
browser, so that the instructor may have the report in hand while 
heading into the classroom. 
 

 
Figure 4: The Application Detects a Student Pleading for Help 

with a Printable Intervention Report. 
 
Finally, while word clouds are not empirical visualizations, they 
are popular because some instructors believe they can get an 
overall sense of the class (Figure 5). Here, the instructor can 
specify a word cloud to represent some or all of the discussion 
posts.  
 

Figure 5: Word Cloud. 

Over time, the data available within the application will include 
enough history to compare charts and word clouds across terms 
and/or instructors. 
 
While this application is intended to demonstrate the power of 
real-time learning analytics, Unizin hopes that mapping the 
intervention alerts will also be useful in informing early warning 
systems, and thusly contribute to student retention. Lessons we 
learn from this endeavor may eventually contribute to an 
empirical base of knowledge within the real time analytics space 
that drives alerts for other administrative efficiencies. 

2. WHO WE ARE 
Unizin [4] is a consortium of like-minded land grant institutions 
in higher education facilitating the transition toward collaborative 
digital education. Our mission is to improve the learning 
experience by providing an environment built on collaboration, 
data, standards, and scale. 

Our offerings include Engage, an eText reader platform and 
collaborative learning tool for the delivery of digital learning 
materials, including Open Educational Resources, faculty-
authored course packs, and publisher content. 

3. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
In keeping with this year’s conference theme of a “convergence of 
communities”, the author thanks: 

Dr. Vince Kellen, Senior Vice Provost and Chief Information 
Officer at University of Kentucky, which is not a Unizin member 
institution, for the use cases that justify this tool. 

Instructure, makers of the Canvas LMS, for their support in 
providing the experimental Canvas Live Events feed. 

IMS Global Learning Consortium, maintainers of the Caliper 
Analytics framework. 

Ms. Kimberly Arnold, Senior Evaluation Consultant, University 
of Wisconsin – Madison, for her editorial support. 

REFERENCES 
[1] S. Knight, & K. Littleton. Discourse ? Centric Learning 

Analytics: Mapping the Terrain. Journal of Learning 
Analytics, 2(1):185 – 209, 2015.  

[2] Canvas Live Events feed by Instructure. URL:  
http://canvas.beta.instructure.com/doc/api/file.live_events.html  

[3] Caliper Analytics Framework, IMS Global Learning URL: 
http://www.imsglobal.org/activity/caliperram 

[4] Unizin Educational Consortium. URL: http://unzin.org/ 
[5] Promotional Video for Unizin Sentiment Visualizer.  E-mail 

author for the current URL.

 



