
Integrated representations and small data - towards
contextualized and embedded analytics tools for learners

Andreas Harrer
Department of Informatik, TU Clausthal

Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany
andreas.harrer@tu-clausthal.de

Tilman Göhnert
COLLIDE research group

University Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany
goehnert@collide.info

ABSTRACT
We present an approach to support learners by means of vi-
sualization and contextualization of learning analytics inter-
ventions in the learning process. We follow up on conceptual
work of colleagues and derive further design principles ori-
ented towards learners as recipients of LA results. These are
shown with implementations in two distinct projects to ful-
fill learners information in collaborative learning processes.

Keywords
Learner-centered Analytics, Embedded Visualizations, De-
sign Principles for Interventions

1. DESIGN OF LA INTERVENTIONS
The currently prevailing approach of dashboards with a

multitude of statistical visualizations requires a sound knowl-
edge of interpretative skills to make use of analytics results.
While this can be assumed for researchers and partially for
teachers of formal domains, it cannot be assumed for learn-
ers generally. We join the position of Alyssa Wise in [6],
where she proposes a specific design framework for peda-
gogical interventions and introduces basic principles for their
design. We will accentuate the aspects for learner support in
collaborative learning scenarios and add two new principles
for the design of interventions from a system perspective.

The design principles presented in [6] will be summarized
in the following and accentuated by our specific position on
analytics for collaborative learning scenarios and the design
of systems supporting in the task of self-regulation:

Integration means that the use of analytics should be
an integral part of the learning activity. We go a step fur-
ther to demand a direct embedding and linkage of the repre-
sentation of analysis results with the learning environment.
This contextualization of the intervention can improve the
learner’s understanding of the intervention.

Agency aims at the goal that LA interventions shall sup-
port self-regulation of learners instead of distracting them.
In our interpretation of learner-centered LA we stress the

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
LAK ’15, Mar 16-20, 2015, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA
ACM 978-1-4503-3417-4/15/03.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723665 .

importance of allowing learners to retrieve LA results pro-
actively to support their self-regulation.

Reference Frame postulates a point for comparison a
learner can refer to when using analytics. These can be ac-
tivity structures or expectations a teacher specified before as
well as the learner’s own previous activities. With our focus
on collaborative learning, we also refer to other learners and
learning groups as reference frame. Awareness about peer
learners / groups in a joint context can be perceived as a
means to create a shared reference frame.

Dialogue creates a space for negotiation and discussion
around the interpretation of analytics. Information serves
as a reflection tool and dialogic tool between teachers and
learners, reducing the difference of power between instructor
and instructee in typical LA scenarios where teachers collect
and keep data about the students for monopolistic usage.
In collaborative scenarios this is also extended to dialogues
between groups of learners, specifically for group-reflection
or inter-group collaborations.

We would like to stress that learner-centered analytics is
typically not based on aggregation of mass data, but on the
contrary specific to the learners’ immediate context and to
a limited degree their peer learners. Usually the number
of interactions of one learner with a learning system at a
semantic level, i.e. beyond typing, clicks and mouse move-
ment, ranges in a few hundred items, which is surely still
small data that is most relevant. Thus we propose to add
the principle Scope that takes into account which informa-
tion is relevant and useful for analysis and interpretation.

With respect to the interpretation of analytics results by
learners we suggest - in the spirit of Abowds’s and Beale’s
general interaction framework [1] - to reduce the gap be-
tween the learner’s input interface, i.e. the learning envi-
ronment, and the output interface, i.e. the representation
of analytics results. This results in more understandable
representations that learners can interpret with more ease.
Thus, we propagate to take up representations used in the
learning environment and adopt them for the visualization
of analytics results to keep familiarity for the students. To
stress this congruence between input and output represen-
tations, we propose the principle of Representation Con-
sistency. This is also in line with earlier work on represen-
tational guidance [5] in the field of CSCL that explored the
effects of representations used by learners on the quality of
their learning.

To illustrate the design principles in collaborative learning
scenarios we will present designs developed in two projects
to support learners specifically in their learning processes.

406



2. INTERVENTIONS IN METAFORA
Metafora is a project that combines constructionism and

collaboration with a technical platform, resulting in an ap-
proach we call learning to learn together (L2L2) [2]. L2L2
behaviours explored in our research are mutual engagement
when performing collaborative tasks, distributed leadership,
dialogue in appropriate spaces, and peer assessment.

The Planning Tool is a web-based application that pro-
vides a visual language for planning, enactment, and reflec-
tion of Metafora learning activities. This language consists
of activities, methods to realize activities, roles, attitudes,
and connectors between these graphical components.

Figure 1: Metafora Planning & Reflection Tool

The embedded reflection tool offers the semantic linkage
of a current state in the planning tool with its creation pro-
cess and allows so reflection about this process. Figure 1
shows the alignment of the reflection tool directly beneath
the corresponding plan. Based on a timeline-metaphor akin
to project planning tools or sports tickers the relevant learn-
ing activities are visualized as bars and important learning
situations / events as icons explorable on mouse-over. As an
example the figure shows the finalization of five learning ac-
tivities (green underlayed elements in the plan) represented
as five completion events (green cards) on the timeline in
their temporal relation, preparing the process for reflection.

Directly embedding the reflection tool and optical super-
imposing of process and artefact (i.e. the plan) follows a
very high degree of Integration and also Representation
Consistency. The reflection tool is shown on learner’s de-
mand and faded out, too, which stresses Agency for self-
regulation. The Reference Frame is created from the
learner’s own process and the activities of her/his learning
group. Thus, the Scope of relevant data is constrained to
a small context, yet with a high potential for reflection and
self-regulation.

3. ANALYTICS WORKBENCH
Another example for a technical analysis system that can

be used in accordance with the design principles for learn-
ing analytics interventions is the Analytics Workbench1 [3].
This workbench is based on the combination of a Web-based
user interface for authoring analysis processes and an exten-
sible server-based processing system.

Figure 2 shows an example of Representation Consis-
tency using workbench analyses. It is taken from the con-

1http://workbench.collide.info

text of the Go-Lab project2 and shows on the top an example
for a concept map created by a student and at the bottom
feedback created through an analysis process performed with
the workbench [4]. The analysis depends on the comparison
of an expert concept map (acting as a Reference Frame)
with a concept map created by a learner. Thus the Scope
of the analysis is very small, it focuses only the result of
on individual student in comparison to the reference. The
analysis result is a graph which compares which edges ex-
ist in both maps (colored brown), which exist only in the
student map (blue), and which exist only in the expert map
(green). Here both the original map and the analysis result
are represented consistently as graphs, thus facilitating the
understanding of the connection between the two.

Figure 2: Concept Map and Analysis Feedback

4. REFERENCES
[1] A. Dix, J. Finlay, G. Abowd, and R. Beale.

Human-Computer Interaction. Prentice Hall, 2004.

[2] T. Dragon, M. Mavrikis, B. McLaren, A. Harrer,
C. Kynigos, R. Wegerif, and Y. Yang. Metafora: A
web-based platform for learning to learn together in
science and mathematics. IEEE Transactions on
Learning Technologies, 2013.

[3] T. Go?hnert, A. Harrer, T. Hecking, and H. U. Hoppe.
A workbench to construct and re-use network analysis
workflows - concept, implementation, and example
case. In Proc. of ASONAM 2013, 2013.

[4] S. Manske, T. Hecking, L. Bollen, T. Go?hnert,
A. Ramos, and H. U. Hoppe. A flexible framework for
the authoring of reusable and portable learning
analytics gadgets. In Proc. of ICALT 2014, 2014.

[5] D. D. Suthers. Towards a systematic study of
representational guidance for collaborative learning
discourse. Journal of Universal Computer Science,
2001.

[6] A. F. Wise. Designing pedagogical interventions to
support student use of learning analytics. In Proc. of
LAK 2014, 2014.

2http://www.go-lab-project.eu/

407





