
Tracing physical movement during practice-based 
learning through Multimodal Learning Analytics 

Donal Healion 
National College of Art & 

Design, Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 

healiond@staff.ncad.ie 

Sam Russell 
National College of Art & 

Design, Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 

russells@staff.ncad.ie 

Mutlu Cukurova 
UCL Knowledge Lab 

University College London, 
United Kingdom 

m.cukurova@ucl.ac.uk 

Daniel Spikol 
Malmö University 

Malmö,  
Sweden 

daniel.spikol@mah.se 
 

ABSTRACT 
In this paper, we pose the question, can the tracking and analysis of 
the physical movements of students and teachers within a Practice-
Based Learning (PBL) environment reveal information about the 
learning process that is relevant and informative to Learning 
Analytics (LA) implementations? Using the example of trials 
conducted in the design of a LA system, we aim to show how the 
analysis of physical movement from a macro level can help to 
enrich our understanding of what is happening in the classroom. 
The results suggest that Multimodal Learning Analytics (MMLA) 
could be used to generate valuable information about the human 
factors of the collaborative learning process and we propose how 
this information could assist in the provision of relevant supports 
for small group work. More research is needed to confirm the initial 
findings with larger sample sizes and refine the data capture and 
analysis methodology to allow automation. 

CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing~Interactive learning environments 
• Applied computing~Collaborative learning 
• Information systems~Data analytics 

Keywords 
Practice-based learning; collaborative problem solving; 
collaborative learning environment; learning analytics; movement. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
This paper discusses the exploration of physical movement by both 
students and teachers while engaged in Collaborative Problem 
Solving (CPS) during PBL activities. Using data gathered from 
multimodal sources, we examine the movements of students and 
teachers that occur within the learning environment, to gain 
information about the physical nature of collaborative group work. 
Our research question is how can students' and teachers' movement 
around the furniture be used to gain a better understanding of 
students collaborative learning processes? For the purposes of this 
paper, the movements analysed are at the macro level (i.e. within 
the classroom space). These movements are tracked via a range of 
multimodal sensing devices with analysis carried out by a mixture 
between human and machine coding. The intent of this research is 
to use an enhanced understanding of the collaborative learning 
process to inform the development of LA implementations. 

 

2. BACKGROUND 
The work described in this paper has been carried out as part of the 
Practice-based Experiential Learning Analytics Research and 
Support (PELARS) project, a three year, EU funded FP7 research 
and design project that seeks to create a Learning Analytics System 
(LAS) suitable for implementation in the teaching of PBL activities 
in three learning contexts, secondary Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) subjects, third level 
interaction design and third level engineering education. The 
project seeks to understand how students learn while engaged in 
open-ended CPS in PBL activities in these scenarios [1]. The LAS 
is designed to achieve this through the aggregation and analysis of 
various multimodal data streams generated by sensing technologies 
embedded in the learning environment (video, audio, still image 
capture and data log files) and user generated data (via “sentiment” 
feedback buttons and a mobile application). 

3. METHODOLOGY 
Outlined below are two trials carried out during cycles of iterative 
prototyping, trials and evaluation established within the PELARS 
project to test the LAS and associated learning environment “in the 
wild” and incorporate user feedback into subsequent design 
iterations.  
 
The hypothesis of the first trial is that students engaged in a PBL 
task at standing height tables would physically move more than 
those seated at standard height tables and that these movements 
would give rise to more interactions with their peers. Six table tops 
of various shapes were produced with one table top of each shape 
mounted at 770mm (sitting height) and one at 1,020mm (standing 
height). Table 1 in the results section shows the trial findings.  
 
The purpose of the second trial (along with testing the LAS) was to 
record the movement and interactions of students engaged in a PBL 
task at specially designed standing tables with circular table tops to 
allow comparison with those of their peers seated at standard height 
rectangular tables. It further sought to track the movements and 
interactions of the teachers/facilitators during the activity. Two 
sample spaghetti diagrams visualising the movements of a student 
and a facilitator during this trial are shown in the results section. 
Both of these trials were conducted in a classroom type 
environment with randomised groups of three and four, mixed 
gender, secondary school-level students. 

4. RESULTS 
Table 1 below shows the results from Trial 1. It details the number 
of movements away from the appointed table, interactions with 
other students, number of interventions by four facilitators at each 
table and number of times the students reform at the table in the 
same or different configurations. The figures shown in the rows for 
each table are the aggregated totals for each of the three students at 
that table. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact 
the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029474 



 
Table 1. Movements and interactions during Trial 1 

Ta
bl

e 
N

o.
 

M
ov

es
 

fro
m

 T
ab

le
 

In
iti

at
ed

 
In

te
ra

ct
io

n 

Su
bj

ec
t o

f 
in

te
ra

ct
io

n 

Fa
ci

lit
at

or
 

vi
sit

s t
o 

ta
bl

e 
G

ro
up

 
re

fo
rm

s: 
Sa

m
e 

G
ro

up
 

re
fo

rm
s: 

D
iff

er
en

t 

HTR 37 8 8 19 5 23 

HTH 39 9 1 18 4 17 

HTS 12 2 2 19 7 5 

LTR 4 2 6 19 0 1 

LTH 1 0 5 24 0 0 

LTS 9 9 1 23 0 0 

HTR = High Table Round, HTH = High Table Hexagonal, 
HTS = High Table Square, LTR = Low Table Round, 

LTH = Low Table Hexagonal, LTS = Low Table Square 
 
The diagrams below were generated from data collected in Trial 2 
to show the greatest amount of student movement (Fig. 1 Student 
5) and movements of the main facilitator (Fig. 2 Facilitator 1). Each 
line represents a return movement for the subject involved unless 
an onward movement is indicated. 

 
Figure 1. Spaghetti diagram showing the movements of 

Student 5 during Trial 2 

 
Figure 2. Spaghetti diagram showing the movements of 

Facilitator 1 during Trial 2 

5. DISCUSSION 
Collaboration is a “coordinated, synchronous activity that is the 
result of a continued attempt to construct and maintain a shared 
conception of a problem” [3] (p.70). It is a complex learning 
process that requires certain conditions to be satisfied for its 
success. These include shared goals, discussions and negotiations 
for accommodating others’ perspectives and organised actions to 
reach a more desirable state from a problem state [2]. However, the 
fundamental condition for collaboration is the social interaction of 
students. Not all social interactions lead to collaboration, but all 
collaboration is a product of social interaction. Hence, in this paper, 
we investigated different furniture designs using a MMLA system 
and established that different furniture designs lead to varied levels 
of social interaction.  Our results show that standing height 
hexagonal and round tables lead to more movements and social 
interactions between students compared to sitting height and square 
tables. Given the small sample size, varying contexts and 
participant student profiles of the trials, more research is required 
to confirm results and expand on this current work. However, the 
outcome of this exploration points towards the importance of the 
consideration of human factors in the design of learning 
environments and the LA technology that is implemented within it.  
The results confirm our hypothesis that the physical form of a 
workstation design has a bearing on group formation and dynamics. 
In this paper, we show that the design of furniture elements within 
the learning environment has an effect on the number of 
movements and interactions between the student groups. Of 
significance to LA design is that in order to acquire as complete a 
data set as possible, adequate resources for the PBL activity need 
to be supplied within the range of the LAS sensors or the sensing 
technology should have the capability to “follow” the student when 
away from the appointed workstation. These findings point to 
meaningful information to help researchers, teachers and learners 
understand, through the use of MMLA, what is happening in the 
classroom while engaged in CPS in PBL activities. Further work is 
required to validate these initial findings with larger sample sizes 
and to refine the data analysis process through automation. 

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is co-funded by the European Union under the PELARS 
project (Grant Agreement # 619738) under the Seventh Framework 
Programme of the European Commission. 

7. REFERENCES 
[1] Cukurova, M., Avramides, K., Spikol, D., Luckin, R. & 

Mavrikis, M. 2016. An analysis framework for collaborative 
problem solving in practice-based learning activities: a 
mixed-method approach. In Proc. of the Sixth Int. Conf. on 
Learning Analytics & Knowledge (LAK '16). 84-88. ACM, 
New York, NY, USA. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883900  

[2] Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. 1995. The construction of 
shared knowledge in collaborative problem-solving. In C. E. 
O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported collaborative learning. 
69–97. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 

[3] OECD. 2015. Draft Collaborative Problem Solving 
Framework. Retrieved from: 
http://www.oecd.org/pisa/pisaproducts/Draft PISA 2015 
Collaborative Problem Solving Framework.pdf



