
Investigating Social and Semantic User Roles  
in MOOC Discussion Forums 

Tobias Hecking 
University of Duisburg-Essen 

Lotharstraﬂe 63/65 
47048 Duisburg, Germany 
hecking@collide.info 

Irene-Angelica Chounta 
University of Duisburg-Essen 

Lotharstraﬂe 63/65 
47048 Duisburg, Germany 
chounta@collide.info 

H. Ulrich Hoppe 
University of Duisburg-Essen 

Lotharstraﬂe 63/65 
47048 Duisburg, Germany 

hoppe@collide.info 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the analysis of the social and semantic 
structure of discussion forums in massive open online courses 
(MOOCs) in terms of information exchange and user roles. To 
that end, we analyse a network of forum users based on 
information-giving relations extracted from the forum data. 
Connection patterns that appear in the information exchange 
network of forum users are used to define specific user roles in a 
social context. Semantic roles are derived by identifying thematic 
areas in which an actor seeks for information (problem areas) and 
the areas of interest in which an actor provides information to 
others (expertise). The interplay of social and semantic roles is 
analysed using a socio-semantic blockmodelling approach. The 
results show that social and semantic roles are not strongly 
interdependent. This indicates that communication patterns and 
interests of users develop simultaneously only to a moderate 
extent. In addition to the case study, the methodological 
contribution is in combining traditional blockmodelling with 
semantic information to characterise participant roles. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human Factors; K.3.1 
[Computer Uses in Education]: collaborative learning; H.4.2 
[Types of Systems]: Decision support 

General Terms 
Algorithms, Measurement, Experimentation, Theory. 

Keywords 
Discussion Forums, MOOCs, Blockmodeling, Socio-semantic 
analysis. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
For online learning courses with no direct interaction between 
learners and tutors, discussion forums are commonly used as 
communication channels for information exchange between peers. 

This is especially the case with massive open online courses 
(MOOCs) where, in the absence of individual support by a tutor, 
threaded discussion forums are often the only means for 
information exchange and peer-to-peer-support provided by the 
MOOC platform.  
The use of discussion forums in MOOCs has to be considered in a 
differentiated way. On one hand, only a small fraction of all 
participants in a MOOC use the forum to communicate [23] but 
forum activity often goes along with higher engagement in the 
course and completion rates [2, 10]. On the other hand, supported 
learner discussions in MOOCs have the potential of involving a 
large community in sustainable collaborative knowledge building 
in a social context (c.f. [12, 30]). In order to provide the necessary 
support, there is a strong need for a better understanding of the 
structure and function of the existing discussion forums. Further 
insights regarding information exchange in discussion forums in 
online courses can contribute to improvements with respect to the 
design and application of discussion forums or to the development 
of new types of communication channels for learners in online 
courses. 
In this paper we aim to explore the characteristics of structured 
information exchange in a MOOC discussion forum. In particular, 
a forum community can be structured at least in two dimensions, 
namely, the social dimension and the semantic dimension. The 
social dimension is represented as a social network with relations 
between the users based on their communication ñ i.e. ìwho is 
talking to whom?î. The semantic dimension reflects the semantic 
content the actors discuss in the discussion forum ñ i.e. ìwho is 
talking about what?î.  
Most of existing research on discussion forums in the learning 
context focuses on either the social or the semantic dimension. 
However, in order to get a more complete picture of the 
community based on discussion forums, a combined analysis of 
both dimensions is necessary. This requires mixed techniques 
from social network analysis and content analysis. To that end, we 
investigate the discussion forum of a MOOC with respect to the 
social and semantic structure of information exchange and user 
roles. The course was named ìIntroduction to Corporate Financeî, 
it took place over a six-week period (11/2013 to 12/2013) and was 
offered at the Coursera1 platform. 
As a first step, information-seeking and corresponding 
information-giving posts are identified using automatic post 
classification. The classified posts are used to model a directed 
network of forum users and the information-giving relations 
between them. In addition, on the semantic level a user is 
represented by the thematic areas of interest in which the actor 
                                                                 
1 https://www.coursera.org/ 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
permissions@acm.org. 
LAK '16, April 25 - 29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883924 
 



seeks for information (problem areas) and the areas of interest in 
which the actor provides information to others (expertise). While 
a social network of forum users explicitly models person-to-
person relations, on the semantic level similar interests of two 
actors do not necessarily imply a social relation. Blockmodelling 
as an existing technique [9] for role modelling of users based on 
connection patterns to other users in a social network is extended 
by incorporating the semantic models of the users based on their 
information-seeking and information-giving interests. We call this 
approach socio-semantic blockmodelling. A role can be 
interpreted as a group of participants with similar connection 
patterns in a thematic context. Inferred relations between those 
roles give insights to the main structure of information exchange 
between users of different roles in the MOOC discussion forum. 
In particular the proposed approach is used to answer the 
following research questions: 

ï To what extent does the community of actors in the 
discussion forum exhibits a social role structure 
discoverable by blockmodels? To what extent is the 
community structured in semantically coherent 
subgroups or sub-communities of interests?  

ï To what extent are the social and semantic structure 
interdependent? 

ï Can socio-semantic blockmodelling reveal the basic 
structure of the forum communication in a meaningful 
way? 

The paper is structured as follows: After this introduction Section 
2 gives an overview on related work and current developments in 
the research on discussion forums in MOOCs. Section 3 describes 
the extraction of an information exchange network from Coursera 
forum data. An introduction to blockmodelling and a detailed 
description of the proposed extension is given in Section 4. The 
main findings are summarised in Section 5 and further discussed 
in Section 5, which concludes the paper.  

2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
Discussion forums have been widely used in MOOCs to 

facilitate communication between participants and to scaffold 
collaboration. The collection of posts in a MOOC discussion 
forums accounts for the information flow between learners from 
various knowledge backgrounds and is an indicator for 
collaborative knowledge building between learners with diverse 
knowledge backgrounds [33].  Related research has shown that 
users engagement in MOOC discussion forum tend to differ. 
While many users are not active at all or use the forum purpose-
specific (i.e. participants use forums either to ask for assignmentsí 
solutions or to get rapid and trustworthy response to specific 
questions) [28], MOOC forums are usually dominated by few, 
highly active users, who can influence other participants and 
stimulate and sustain the discussions [21, 35]. This diverse 
behaviour results in different roles of users that can be described 
in various aspects using different analysis techniques.  

Techniques used for the analysis of MOOC discussion forums can 
be characterised as content related or communication related. 
Content related analyses aim to uncover the nature of forum 
contributions from the post content [31]. Cui and Wise [7] apply 
content analysis and machine learning to identify forum threads 
where participants discuss the course content which is important 
for the investigation of information exchange. Content analysis 
can also be used to characterise forum users based on the types of 
contributions they made [3, 24]. For communication related 
analyses, often social network analysis techniques are applied. 

Social networks between users based on common discussion 
threads can serve to investigate the coherence of the underlying 
social network [15], detection of communication patterns [14] as 
well as community support [26]. However, when it comes to role 
modelling based on social relations in discussion forums finer 
grained network modelling is required such that the concrete post/ 
reply communication between individuals are adequately 
reflected. In discussion forums with nested threads, these relations 
can be observed directly from the thread structure [29]. However, 
in forums with a more linear thread structure, such as the Coursera 
forums investigated in this paper, the identification of direct 
communication between users requires content-analytic 
appraoches such as discussion act tagging [3]. User roles can then 
be inferred based on communication behaviour which is reflected 
in the position of an actor in the social network. There are 
different possibilities to define user roles in social communication 
networks. Abnar et al. [1] use centrality measures in 
subcommunities to identify roles such as leaders and mediators in 
a forum communication network. In [20]  users are characterised 
with respect to the number of help-giving and help-seeking posts 
giving higher values to those users who reach more others with 
their posts to those who repeatedly target a small set of 
communication partners.  

In the work described in this paper, techniques of network and 
content analysis are combined to characterise roles of users by 
blending the position in the information exchange network with 
semantic similarity based on content analysis of the threads they 
were active in (see Section 4). We have found a somewhat similar 
approach in the work of Yang et al. [36] who combine network 
data with post content in a single model to identify 
subcommunities of learners based on discussion topics and reply 
relations in the forum. However, Yang et al. assume that there is 
an interplay between usersí interests and social relations that is 
inherently encoded in the model. In our work, however, we 
investigate the possible interdependence between social relations 
and semantic similarity more closely with respect to user roles in 
a network that represents course related information exchange 
more explicitly. Also, using block modelling approach, we do not 
assume that users with the same role have to form a cohesive 
subcommunity.  

3. NETWORK EXTRACTION FROM 
FORUM DATA 
The dataset comprises forum posts from the Coursera MOOC on 
ìIntroduction to Cooperate Financeî conducted in six weeks 
between 11/2013 and 12/2013. Overall there were 8336 posts in 
870 different threads by 1540 different users. 1436 posts were 
made by anonymous users. Many of the discussion threads are 
used by the course participants to introduce themselves, to seek 
for learning groups with peers of the same mother tongue, etc. We 
explicitly restricted the analysis to discussion threads dedicated 
specifically to issues regarding lectures, exercises and quizzes for 
the analysis since we are only interested in tracking information 
giving and information seeking related to the course content. This 
resulted in a dataset of 540 threads with 5533 posts from 945 
different users. It is important to note that all anonymous posts 
were counted as posts of a single artificial ìanonymousî user. 
The starting point of the analysis is the set of forum threads of the 
discussion forum. These threads contain a sequence of posts 
where for each post the unique identifier, post content, and the 
authorís identity is available. The analysis relies on the social 
network of users who participated in content-related, knowledge 
exchange in the discussion forum. In contrast to most of the 



existing studies (see Section 2), the network should reflect the 
directed relations between users who ask for information and 
users who reply to these specific information requests. Thus, the 
initial task is to extract this network from the raw forum thread 
data and can be structured in three successive steps, namely (1) 
post classification, (2) post linking, (3) transformation to a social 
knowledge exchange network. An example of the procedure for 
the example discussion thread in Table 1 is shown in Figure 1.  

Table 1: Example of a discussion thread with three users. 

Post User Content Post type 

P1 User A I have a problem with 
Ö 

Information-
seeking 

P2 User B Have you tried the 
following  

Information-giving 

P3 User A That helps. Thank you. Other 

P4 User C An alternative solution 
Ö 

Information-giving 

 

 
Figure 1: Basic scheme of network extraction from forum 
posts. 

3.1 Post Classification 
In order to identify the information giving and information 
seeking relations between the users, the first step is to identify the 
posts that can be considered as information-giving or information-
seeking. In previous studies different types of posts in MOOC 
discussion forums are described [3, 16, 22, 24]. In this study the 
classification schemes for MOOC discussion forums described by 
Arguello and Shaffer [3] and the similar classification of Liu, 
Kidzinski and Dillenbourg [24] are generalised to three classes of 
posts: information-seeking (all types of questions, clarification 
requests, report of an issue), information-giving (answers, issue 
resolutions, hints and recommendations), and other posts. For this 
task an automated classification model was trained on 500 posts 
that were hand-classified by three experts. The validity of the 
classification scheme was ensured with a high interrater 
agreement among all three raters according to Fleiss-Kappa (! =
.78, ' < .005).  
The organisation of the course forum in sub forums is used to 
filter the dataset prior to the automatic post classification. In 
previous work [20], we proposed forum post classification on the 
entire dataset incorporating threads that, likely, do not contain 
content-related discussions. Social posts, like self-introduction or 
requests for study groups, were also classified with considerable 
accuracy using since the sub forum is a good predictor for those 
posts. In this study, however, information on the sub forum in 
which a discussion thread occurs is used to restrict the analysis to 

sub forums that are explicitly dedicated to content-related issues 
such as assignments and lectures. Posts were encoded by 
structural features (position in the thread, number of votes) and 
content related features (text length, occurrences of questions 
words, question/exclamation marks, and specific phrases such as 
ìneed helpî or ìhelps youî). The best results, based on 10-fold 
cross validation, were obtained by a random forest classifier [5] 
when bagging with 10 iterations was applied. Information seeking 
posts can be classified with high F1-score = 0.77. For information 
giving posts the F1-score is also moderately high F1-score = 0.66. 
However, posts of type ìotherî often lead to misclassifications as 
the confusion matrix in Table 2 shows. 

Table 2: Confusion matrix for post classification. 

 True inf. 
seeking 

True inf. 
giving 
 

True 
other 

Class 
precision 

Pred. inf. 
seeking 75 16 2 0.81 

Pred. inf. 
giving 27 88 30 0.61 

pred.  
others 0 17 36 0.68 

class 
recall 0.74 0.73 0.53  

 
In order to reduce the effect of misclassified other posts, the final 
classification was improved using the iterative classification 
algorithm described by Duinn and Bridge [27]. This algorithm 
uses the results from the classifier described above to compute for 
each post the number of preceding posts of each class. Then an 
additional classifier is trained to incorporate this information 
updates the initial classification, which leads to improved results 
since misclassifications such as classification as information 
giving posts without a preceding information-seeking post can be 
avoided. This increases F1-scores for information-giving posts 
increases to 0.79 and for information-seeking posts to 0.71 based 
on evaluation on another 200 hand-classified posts. 

3.2 Network Extraction 
Based on the classified posts, we initialise the network of 
information seeking and related information giving posts.  
As a first step, we remove the anonymous user and isolated users 
(users who did not receive a reply to their posts). This resulted in 
a network of 647 of the original 1540 users. These users 
contributed 4096 posts in 502 threads that spread over 27 of the 
40 sub forums. Out of these, 1523 posts were classified as 
ìquestionsî, 1832 posts were classified as ìanswersî resulting in 
1303 links between the users. 741 posts were classified as ìotherî, 
and thus, not reflected in the edges of the resulting network. On 
average, each user in the network made 4.34 posts (SD=7.246) in 
2.61 threads (SD=3.608) over 1.71 forums (SD=1.281). From 
these posts, on average per user, 1.61 were classified as 
ìquestionsî (SD=2.740), 1.94 were classified as ìanswersî 
(SD=4.042) and 0.78 were classified as ìotherî (SD=1.603). As it 
is shown from these distributions, users have a limited activity in 
the discussion forum throughout the course and they do not get 
involved or spread over many threads and forums. 
In the following, all posts classified as ìotherî are filtered out 
from each thread such that only the ìinformation seekingî and 
ìinformation givingî posts remain. As an intermediate step before 
the social network between users can be created, a network of 
posts has to be built (see Figure 1). The basis for this is the 



observation that the users in Coursera discussion forum usually 
maintain the structure of a thread themselves, such that the 
relations between posts are recognizable. Most content related 
threads start with a request for information. This initial request is 
either directly answered by another user or further questions 
follow until an information giving post occurs in the sequence. 
After a sequence of information giving post sometimes further 
questions are posted. Comments are attached to a single post. This 
helps to relate posts to previous posts even if the discussion has 
proceeded and other posts occurred in between. Sequences of 
comments attached to a parent posts can be seen as sub-threads 
that can contain both types of posts with the parent post as initial 
post. Consequently, a forum thread and the corresponding sub-
threads based on comments can be decomposed into alternating 
sequences of information seeking and information giving posts. 
This structure enables the linking of information giving to 
previous information seeking posts by linking the posts of each 
information-giving sequence to the posts of the most recent 
sequence of information-seeking posts in a thread.  
In the resulting forum post network each post node is annotated 
with the author of the post and a timestamp. Next, each post node, 
labelled with the same author, is collapsed into a single node 
representing the user (Figure 1) resulting in the final knowledge 
exchange network between forum users, similar to the approach 
described in [19]. 
 

4. APPROACH: SOCIO-SEMANTIC 
BLOCKMODELLING 
Blockmodelling [9] is a method to reduce a network to a macro 
structure by grouping actors groups based on their connection 
patterns and modelling relations between them. Those groups are 
commonly interpreted as roles or positions since it is assumed that 
similar connection patterns indicate the similar function. Figure 2 
gives an example of a blockmodel with three roles and relations 
between them that reflects the hierarchical structure of the 
network. In this section the existing techniques for 
blockmodelling based on similarities of connection patterns of 
users are described first. The extensions we made incorporate the 
semantic similarity of users based on their interest in thematic 
areas. This new approach is described in Subsections 4.3 and 4.4. 

4.1 Blockmodelling Foundations 
In general, blockmodelling groups actors based on a certain notion 
of similarity. These groups reflect the roles of the actors and do 
not necessarily have to be cohesive, in the sense that actors of the 
same role are densely interconnected among themselves. A 
blockmodel fitted to the network structure can be used to infer 
relations between those groups of actors. In generalized 
blockmodelling approach [9] one distinguishes between various 
types of relations that can exist between two groups/roles 
indicating different types of connection patterns between the 
actors of the roles. The most important types of relations for this 
work are depicted in Figure 3.  
A complete directed relation between two groups A and B is 
given if all actors in A have an outgoing relation to all actors in B. 
This indicates the strongest possible relationship between two 
groups. Regular relations can be seen as a relaxation of a complete 
relation. If a regular relation from group A to group B exists, all 
actors in A point to at least one actor in B and all actors in B have 
at least one ingoing relation to actors in A. Regular relations are 
very important for this work since they  reflect information flow. 
For information-giving relations between actors, regular relations 

between groups can be interpreted as existing information flow 
from group A to group B. Note that complete relations are a 
special case of regular relations. If no relations between actors in 
group A and group B are present, the relationship between the 
groups is considered as null relation. 

 
Figure 2: Example network with regular and structural 
equivalences. 

It is important to note that in forum networks there is often no 
perfect fit of the relations between groups of users to the 
mentioned relation types. For example, if groups A and B both 
contain more than one member and there is only one relation from 
an actor in A to an actor in B, the group relation is far from being 
regular or complete. However, it can also not be considered as 
null-relation as it is defined. In cases were none of the described 
relations are applicable, the relation is chosen that can be applied 
with minimal modifications of the links between the actors in A 
and B. The total number of such modifications is referred as the 
blockmodel error. 
An important fact that is often ignored is that blockmodelling can 
clearly be distinguished from the more common sub-community 
detection [13] in social network analysis. Even though, both, 
blockmodelling and sub-community detection group users in to 
clusters the objectives of these methods are quite different. 
Community detection methods aim to find densely connected 
substructures in the network by finding a clustering such that the 
number of connections within the cluster exceeds the number of 
connections between actors of different clusters as much as 
possible. Blockmodelling does not require any connections 
between actors of the same cluster at all, although they are not 
forbidden (see group B in Figure 2). Moreover, in a blockmodel 
users belong to the same group since they have similar connection 
patterns to users in other groups. Thus, a cluster can be interpreted 
as users with similar position or role in the network. In order to 
highlight this difference compared to sub-communities based on 
dense intra-cluster relations, in the following the groups found by 
user similarity are referred to as roles. 

 
Figure 3: Relation types between two groups of actors. 



4.2 Graph-based Actor Similarity 
Graph based similarity derives actor similarity directly from the 
graph structure. This is the traditional approach for 
blockmodelling. The benefit of this approach is that actors are 
grouped to roles/positions such that the relations described before 
between groups of actors are inherently induced by the grouping 
of the actors. Graph-based similarity measures that are commonly 
applied for blockmodelling are structural and regular similarity.  

4.2.1 Structural Similarity 
Structural similarity [25] is related to the position of the actors 
within the network. Structural similarity can be assesses by 
correlations between the connections of each pair of actors. If two 
actors are structurally equivalent (maximum structural similarity) 
they have ingoing relations from the same set of actors and 
outgoing relations to the same set of actors. For example, actors 3 
and 4 in Figure 2 are structural equivalent. This means they have 
the same position and can be replaced by a single node without 
information loss. A perfect assignment based on structural 
similarity, i.e. all actors in one role are structural equivalent, leads 
to a perfectly fitting blockmodel with only complete and null 
blocks. However, finding such a model in forum networks is quite 
unlikely. Thus, this type of similarity is not used in the 
blockmodels described later in favor of regular similarity 
described next. 

4.2.2 Regular Similarity 
In contrast to structural similarity, regular similarity [34] between 
two actors does not explicitly take into account mutual 
connections to concrete instances of actors in the network. 
Moreover, the regular similarity between two actors measures to 
what extent these two have the same connections to classes of 
actors. Thus, actors with a high regular similarity are considered 
to have the same role in the network. The problem then becomes 
assigning roles to actors such that actors within the same role are 
as similar as possible with respect to the roles of the actors they 
are connected to. If there is an assignment of actors to roles such 
that actors within a role are regular equivalent (maximum regular 
similarity), the fitted blockmodel has only regular and null blocks 
without any errors. For example in Figure 2 a perfect fitting 
blockmodel would result from the regular equivalence classes 
{{1,2,3,4},{5,6},{7,8}}. In order to compute regular similarity in 
this work the REGE algorithm [4] is applied. 

4.3 Semantic Similarity 
In contrast to graph based similarity described before, semantic 
similarity is not computed from the connection patterns in the 
social network. Users can have certain properties like interests, 
age, gender, etc.. The similarity of two users is calculated based 
on the distance of the usersí property set or vector in a certain 
feature space. Thus, blockmodels based on this type of similarity 
can be considered as feature based blockmodels [32]. In those 
blockmodels roles are induced to the social network from external 
observations instead of direct inference from the network 
structure.  
In our approach, the semantic similarity of users is calculated 
from the thematic areas in which they provide information and the 
thematic areas in which they seek for information (Figure 4). 
More formally, the notion of semantic similarity in MOOC 
discussion forums can be described as follows:  
Given two users ux and uy. Each user provides (P) information in 
subsets of all forum threads +,-, +.- ? + and seeks (S) for 
information in+,0, +.0 ? +. The similarity regarding the 

information providing interests or expertise can then be calculated 
as in equation 1. 

123456- 78,, 8.9 = 	
? max ?1237 ,,!, +.-9"#$,%?'$(

max7|+,-|, *+.-*9
 (1) 

 

The term 1237 ,,!, +.-9 corresponds to the similarities between the 
ith thread in which user ux provides information and the set of 
threads in which user uy provides information. The calculation for 
the similarity of their information seeking interest 
1234560 78,, 8.9 of two users can be calculated by their sets of 
threads in which they ask for information accordingly. 
The final semantic similarity of users ux and uy will be defined as 
the average of their expertise similarity and the similarity of their 
information seeking interests, as given in equation 2. 

12345678,, 8.9 = 	
123456- 78,, 8.9 + 	1234560 78,, 8.9

2  
(2) 

 
The distinction between information giving and information 
seeking interests is crucial for role semantic modelling. A role, in 
terms of thematic interests, can be interpreted as users who are 
information providers for the themes X and pull information from 
themes Y. Furthermore, if the distinction between information 
giving and information seeking would not be made, the resulting 
blockmodel is likely to contain mostly relations from a certain 
role to the role itself and would hardly allow for a distinction 
between social and semantic roles since communication in one 
thematic area implies corresponding connections in the 
information exchange network.  
 

 
Figure 4: Semantic similarity of two users based on the 
similarity of threads in which they provide information 
(orange) and seek for information (green). 

 
For the calculation of the similarity between threads which is a 
prerequisite for the calculation of the semantic similarity between 
users, one has several options. Forum threads can be considered as 
documents. Then, one possibility would be to calculate their 
semantic similarities based on latent semantic indexing (LSI) [8], 
which is a well-known technique from information retrieval. LSI, 
in general, derives the similarities between threads based on a 
principal component analysis of the columns of a term-document 
matrix. An alternative approach, which is used in this work, is to 
extract meaningful concepts from the forum threads first and then 
calculate the similarity of threads from the average semantic 



similarity of the assigned concepts. Concept similarity is 
calculated by the UMBC semantic similarity service [17], which 
combines latent semantics analysis on large corpora with word net 
similarity of the assigned concepts. The concept extraction is done 
by the Social Tagging Engine provided by Thompson Reuthersí 
Open Calais2. It extracts concepts from textual documents by 
comparing the documents to to Wikipedia pages. This has several 
benefits compared to other approaches for keyword extraction. 
First, the concepts do not have to be exactly mentioned in the 
thread posts. The assigned concepts generalize the keywords to 
higher-order concepts using Wikipedia page titles as a controlled 
vocabulary, which can be seen as inherent resolution of 
synonyms, polysemy, and disambiguation.  This solves also the 
problem of short text and inexact language which is common in 
discussion forums. Additionally, this approach has the advantage 
of simultaneously assigning meaningful concepts to the threads 
which is very helpful for the interpretability of the semantic 
clusters found in later steps. 

4.4 Socio-semantic Approach 
Next, we show how regular similarity (social role modelling) and 
semantic similarity (semantic role modelling) can be combined 
into a hybrid approach that we call socio-semantic 
blockmodelling. The goal is, given an allocation of users to roles, 
to identify regular relations between semantic coherent (but not 
necessarily socially coherent) roles in the knowledge exchange 
network extracted for the forum data. A directed regular relation 
from a role A to a role B in a regular similarity blockmodel 
indicates information flow from role A to role B since all users in 
A give information to at least one user in B and all users in B 
receive information of at least one user in A (c.f. Section 4.2.2). 
Semantic similarity, as described in Section 4.3, identifies 
semantic coherent roles but with possibly heterogeneous 
communication patterns. For example, a graph based role 
summarizes people who have many outgoing connections 
(information providers) to people of a role with many ingoing 
connections (information consumers). A semantic role can 
characterise users who have problems with topic Xî or who have 
an expertise on topic Y. The combination of both can then be seen 
as a social role in semantic context. 
On the one hand, if the semantic structure of the community is not 
strongly interleaved with the structure of information exchange, it 
might be very hard to find regular relations between roles and the 
resulting blockmodel is very inaccurate. On the other hand, if the 
blockmodel is solely created from role assignments based on 
regular similarity, the resulting blockmodel is likely to be more 
accurate than a blockmodel derived from semantic similarity since 
the roles are discovered using the same criterion that is used to 
identify role relations. However, regular similarity identifies role 
relations based on communication patterns while ignoring the 
interests and semantic coherence of users within a role. The 
problem then is to find a good assignment of users to roles such 
that the resulting blockmodel is as accurate as possible in terms of 
regular role relations (information flow) and a high semantic 
coherence within a role. To achieve this, our socio-semantic 
approach to blockmodelling combines regular and semantic 
similarity in the assignment of users to roles. The roles in this 
context can be interpreted differently. For example, information 
providers for topic X discovered by the semantic approach, can be 
subdivided into different types based on their connection patterns 
in the network discovered based on regular similarity. 
                                                                 
2 http://www.opencalais.com/ 

Combining user features with network structure [32], and finding 
the optimal blockmodel with respect to multiple objectives by 
optimizing role allocations is a hard problem [6, 18]. An indirect 
approach where regular and semantic similarities can be ìmixedî 
into a joint similarity by weighted average (equation 3) gives good 
results and is feasible for big datasets. Further, varying the values 
for the weighting factors allows for investigating the 
interdependency between both semantic and social (regular) 
similarity, which will be reported in Section 5. 

1234-.456/0, 12 =
3455 ? 123455/0, 12 + 3456 ? 123456/0, 12

/3455 + 34562
 (3) 

 
Based on this formulation of similarity a blockmodel is derived as 
follows: 

1. Build a hierarchical clustering based on 
1234-.456/0, 12 for each pair of users. 

2. Determine the number of roles by cluster bootstrapping 
[11], a method that estimates the optimal number of 
clusters given distances/similarities of objects and a 
clustering function by minimising cluster instability.  

3. Assign the role relations such that the blockmodel error 
is minimal described in Section 4.1. 

The sparsity of the network is a problem since it biases the 
inference of relations towards null relations (see Section 4.1). If 
the density of a network is too small, assigning null relations 
always gives a small blockmodel error. For this reason, the 
acceptable error for introducing a regular relation between two 
roles is enhanced in relation to the network density as suggested 
in [37]. 
 

5. RESULTS 
Regular similarity inherently assigns users to roles such that the 
relations between the roles are either (almost) regular or (almost) 
null/non-existent relations. The questions we aim to answer in the 
following Section 5.1 is to what extent the social and semantic 
structure of the community is interleaved. More concretely, how 
well does role assignment based on semantic similarity induces a 
blockmodel that has a small error according to regular relations 
between roles and whether roles deriving from regular similarity 
are also semantically coherent. In Section 5.2 the community in 
the MOOC discussion forum is analysed using the hybrid 
blockmodelling approach introduced in Section 4.4. 

5.1 Semantic vs. Social Structuring 
In the following, the relation between the social structure of the 
social information exchange network and the semantic structure 
based on the similarity of interests/expertise of the users in 
thematic areas in the discussion forum is investigated.  

Table 3: Correlations between different types of similarities 

 structural regular semantic 

structural 1 -0.19 -0.16 

regular -0.19 1 0.36 

semantic -0.16 0.36 1 
 

First, we conducted a correlation analysis between the graph-
based (social) similarities described in Section 4.2 and semantic 
similarity of users (Section 4.3). If social and semantic structure 



were highly correlated, role assignment based on graph-based and 
semantic similarity would result in very similar blockmodels. 
Thus, the parameter settings in equation 3 would have no strong 
effect on the result. The Spearman rank correlations between the 
different types of user similarities are reported in Table 3. All 
correlations are statistically significant (p << .05). There is a low 
positive correlation between regular and semantic similarity. This 
means that there is no strong interdependence between the 
semantic structure based on the information giving and 
information seeking interests (semantically induced roles) and the 
information flow between roles based on connection patterns 
(regular similarity induced roles) in the discussion forum of the 
Cooperate Finance MOOC. This indicates that direct 
communication between users does not influence their interests 
significantly and, vice versa, interests do not affect the social 
structure of the community. Structural equivalence correlates on a 
very low level negatively with the other similarity measures. 
Thus, concrete connections between users can be considered as 
independent from the regular role structures and usersí interests. 
In order to further investigate the relations between social and 
semantic role structures, we generated blockmodels with a 
different emphasis of regular (social) and semantic similarity by 
varying the paramters ?reg and ?sem (equation 3). For each 
blockmodel the normalized blockmodel error (bm_err) is 
provided. The semantic dissimilarity of a role is evaluated by the 
ratio of the average semantic distance of users within the same 
role and the average distance of users of different roles 
(wb_ratio). Consequently, a good blockmodel should have a low 
values for bm_err and wb_ratio. 

 
Figure 5: Blockmodel error (top) and ratio of average 
semantic distance within roles and between roles (bottom) for 
different ratios of ?reg and ?sem. 
The results are presented in Figure 5. For both cases, bw_ratio 
and bm_err, there is a state transition between role assignments 
that emphasize more on social similarity and role assignments that 
emphasize on the semantic similarity of users. The results are 
compared to the average wb_ratio and bm_err of 50 blockmodels 
based on a random assignment of users to roles. Even if the social 
and semantic structure of the community is not strongly related, 
there is at least some influence such that, even for the extreme 
cases, pure semantic and pure social blockmodels are still better 

than random role assignment. These findings support the 
assumption that socio-semantic coevolution takes place in the 
discussion forum to some extent. Furthermore, this shows that the 
community bears a structure in, both, the social dimension and the 
semantic dimension. The proposed hybrid blockmodelling 
approach described in Section 4.4 can be applied to map the 
information flow between different socio-semantic roles, as be 
described in Section 5.2. 

5.2 Socio-semantic Blockmodelling 
In the following, the socio-semantic structure of the forum 
communication is analysed based on a hybrid blockmodel. For our 
analysis we take into account the semantic coherence of roles as 
well as the blockmodel error in terms of regular relations. In order 
to do this, first a good level of emphasis of social and regular 
similarity according to equation 3 has to be found. Figure 6 
depicts the ratio between the blockmodel error bm_error and the 
coherence of the roles (1 - wb_ratio) for different values for ?reg 
and ?sem. As (1 - wb_ratio) has to be as large as possible and 
bm_error as small as possible, a good ìmixtureî is given for 
?reg=1 and ?sem=2.  

 
Figure 6: Ratio between blockmodel error and semantic 
coherence of the roles. 

The resulting blockmodel is depicted in Figure 7. The nodes 
represent the three discovered roles and the edges represent 
regular relations between them. The node size corresponds to the 
number of users assigned to the role and the edge width to the 
number of links present between the roles. 

It is shown that there is one dominant role (role 1) comprising of 
305 users. It has regular relations not only with the other roles but 
also with itself. This means that there is information flow from 
role 1 to role 2 and also information flow within the role indicated 
by the self-loop. The two smaller roles 2 and 3 have different 
connection patterns. Role 2 has only ingoing regular relations to 
the other roles and role 3 has only outgoing relations. This 
indicates there is a smaller set of users who can be characterised 
as information-seekers (role 2) and others as information-
providers (role 3). This is further validated by the mean inreach 
and outreach of the users (columns 3 and 4 of Table 4). As shown 
in [20], in- and outreach combine the post quantity of a user with 
the number of connections the user has to others. Users with a 
high inreach post many information- seeking posts and receive 
information from many different other users. Outreach is defined 



similar for outgoing information- giving relations. Thus, inreach 
corresponds to information- seeking behaviour and high outreach 
to information-giving behaviour. The value for the mean outreach 
is very small for role 2 and the value for inreach is small for role 
3. However, the largest values for both measures can be found for 
role 1. Role 1 can be seen as the core community comprising 
information providers and information seekers as well as users 
who are both. Roles 2 and 3 can then be seen as users who are 
more specialised in their communication behaviour.  

On the semantic level the roles can be differentiated with respect 
to the thematic areas in which they provide information 
(expertise) and areas in which they seek for information (first two 
columns of Table 4. For role 1, there is no clear semantic 
distinction between information giving and seeking interests 
which is also reflected by the self-loop in the blockmodel (Figure 
7). The concept ìMathematical financeî is associated to every role 
since it is an important general concept that has been assigned to 
many threads by the concept extraction described in Section 4.3. 
This is reasonable since many of the assignments in the course 
deal with calculations of various values related to corporate 
finance. Consequently this concept cannot be used to characterise 
the particular roles.  

The most frequent other concepts that were extracted from forum 
threads in which users of role 1 appear as information seekers and 
givers are ìInvestmentî, ìDepreciationî, and ìTaxationî. These 
are some of the main concepts covered during the course. 
Participants had to calculate depreciation and investment rates, as 
part of their assignments. Issues regarding the calculation itself 
and formal requirements (such as the rounding of real numbers) 
were discussed among the participants. In particular, the correct 
formulas were heavily discussed, such that users of role 1 appear 
as both, information givers and information seekers. 

The information seeking role 2 has no key concepts assigned to 
their information giving interests. These users seek for 
information especially in areas related to investments. They 
receive help form users in role 1 and role 3 on this topic. The 
nature of role 2 is further underlined by the fact that many of the 
threads they are active in are additionally annotated with the 
keyword ìquestionî. 

Role 3 can be interpreted as experts for the topics related to 
investment appraisal. However, despite from being a relatively 
small role in terms of number of users and the mean outreach is 
moderately high, users in this role could either be the ones who 
provide some information to a course topic they are good in and 
then stop participating in the forum or show a kind of ìelder 
statesmanî behaviour in the sense that they occasionally 
contribute to the information exchange in the forum as experts in 
topics that are of wide interest for the whole community.  

In general, it can be said that three discovered socio-semantic 
roles structure reflects the general assumptions on MOOC 
discussion forums very well. There is a core community (role 1) 
that is more engaged in the main discussion topics than other 
roles, which can be seen by the higher values for in- and outreach. 
There is also communication within this role. The other roles (role 
2 and 3) correspond to the users who participate in the forum 
communication occasionally and are either information givers or 
information seekers on certain topics. 
 

 
Figure 7: Blockmodel for the forum discussion in the MOOC 
discussion forum. 

 
Table 4: Properties of the discovered roles. 

Role Top inform. 
giving 

Top inform. 
seeking 

Mean 
in-
reach 

Mean 
out-
reach 

1 1. Mathematical 
finance                             

2. Investment                             
3. Depreciation                                 
4. Taxation 

1. Mathematical 
finance                             

2. Investment                             
3. Depreciation         
4. Taxation 

8.38 8.45 

2 None 1. Mathematical 
finance            

2. Investment         
3. Depreciation 
4. Rate of return 
5. Question 

3.58 0.43 

3 1. Mathematical 
finance              

2. Investment        
3. Rate of return 
4. Net present 

value   

1. Ambiguity 
2. Decision 

theory 

0.28 3.08 

 
 

6. CONCLUSION 
We have analysed the social and semantic structure of a 
community of learners participating in a MOOC discussion forum 
with respect to user roles in social and semantic context. In the 
social dimension users were assigned to roles based on their 
regular similarity in the information exchange network of forum 
users. In the semantic dimension, roles were modelled based on 
the thematic areas in which users were active in by providing or 
seeking information. Those semantic roles can be also interpreted 
as expertise and information seeking for specific themes 
respectively.  



We applied our approach on the dataset of a discussion forum that 
supported the online Coursera course ìIntroduction to Corporate 
Financeî. Our research objective was three-fold: a) to define to 
what extent the forum communities of users are socially and 
semantically structured, b) to study to what extent the social and 
semantic structures interdependent and c) to explore whether 
socio-semantic blockmodelling can reveal meaningful information 
about the forum communication structures.  
The results of our study showed that both social and semantic role 
structures are present in the discussion forum of the course 
(Section 5.1). The semantic coherence of user roles with respect to 
the semantic similarity of the users scores far better than a random 
assignment of users to semantic roles. The same can be stated 
about the error of a blockmodel based on regular similarity of the 
users in terms their connection patterns in the information 
exchange network. Consequently, the community in the 
discussion forum did not evolve completely random as it might be 
suggested by the known differences of behaviour and engagement 
of participants in MOOC discussion forums.  
It was also shown that the social roles and the semantic roles of 
the user are not completely independent. We discovered a 
moderate correlation between the regular similarity of the users in 
the network and their semantic similarity. In our hybrid 
blockmodels which combine both types of similarity for role 
assignment the resulting models had a better fit with respect to 
semantic coherence of roles and the blockmodel error with respect 
to the regular role relations than random models, even in the 
extreme cases (only regular similarity or only semantic 
similarity). However, semantic roles and social roles are also not 
completely interchangeable which means that forum 
communication has only limited influence on the interests of users 
and vice versa. External factors such as individual experience as 
well as personal communication preferences might also impact the 
evolution of the forum communication. 
For our dataset, three different roles were discovered based on the 
hybrid social-semantic blockmodelling approach. There was a 
majority of users who discuss the main course content. While for 
the other roles there was only occasional information exchange 
between users within the role, users of this majority role also had 
heavy communication with each other. Apart from that there were 
also users in the two smaller roles who could either be considered 
as users who contributed less to the forum communication where 
one of the roles contained more information providing users on 
specific course topics and the other comprise users who only seek 
for information on very concrete issues.  
All these findings suggest that there is a need for better support of 
information exchange between peers in MOOCs. Advances in the 
design of asynchronous communication in online courses should 
consider better adaptivity to different needs of different user roles. 
As shown, expertise and information-needs in thematic areas are 
not well reflected in the social communication structure of the 
discussion forum. Results from socio-semantic role modelling can 
be used to provide social support, for example, recommendations 
that help students to find proper communication partners for 
certain thematic areas. This might enhance the engagement of 
learners in sustainable knowledge building dialogues and 
information exchange in the discussion forum. 
In our future work we aim to investigate more MOOC discussion 
forums in order to find out whether the structures we have found 
for the course described in this paper can be considered as general 
patterns of forum communication in such online courses. Open 
issues are still to find out which external factors drive the 

evolution of the community and the emergence of different user 
roles and how users of different roles are engaged in other 
activities of the online course. Therefore, on the methodological 
level, it can be interesting to incorporate also user similarity based 
on resource access or engagement patterns into the role modelling.  
 

7. REFERENCES 
[1] Abnar, A., Takaffoli, M., Rabbany, R. and ZaÔane, O. SSRM: 

structural social role mining for dynamic social networks. 
Social Network Analysis and Mining, 5, 1 (2015).  

[2] Anderson, A., Huttenlocher, D., Kleinberg, J. and Leskovec, 
J. Engaging with Massive Online Courses. In Proceedings of 
the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web. 
(Seoul, Korea), 2014, 687-698. 

[3] Arguello, J. and Shaffer, K. Predicting Speech Acts in 
MOOC Forum Posts. In Proceedings of the Ninth 
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media. 
(Oxford, UK), 2015. 

[4] Borgatti, S. P. and Everett, M. G. Two algorithms for 
computing regular equivalence. Social Networks, 15, 4 
(1993), 361-376. 

[5] Breiman, L. Random Forests. Machine Learning, 45, 1 
(2001), 5-32. 

[6] Brusco, M., Doreian, P., Steinley, D. and Satornino, C. 
Multiobjective Blockmodeling for Social Network Analysis. 
Psychometrika, 78, 3 (2013), 498-525. 

[7] Cui, Y. and Wise, A. F. Identifying Content-Related Threads 
in MOOC Discussion Forums. In Proceedings of the Second 
ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale. (Vancouver, BC, 
Canada). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2015, 299-303. 

[8] Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. 
K., and Harshman, R. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. 
Journal of the American society for information science, 
41(6), (1990) 391-407. 

[9] Doreian, P., Batagelj, V., Ferligoj, A. and Granovetter, M. 
Generalized Blockmodeling (Structural Analysis in the Social 
Sciences). Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, 
USA, 2004. 

[10] Engle, D., Mankoff, C. and Carbrey, J. Courseraís 
introductory human physiology course: Factors that 
characterize successful completion of a MOOC. The 
International Review of Research in Open and Distributed 
Learning, 16, 2 (2015), 46-68. 

[11] Fang, Y. and Wang, J. Selection of the number of clusters via 
the bootstrap method. Computational Statistics & Data 
Analysis, 56, 3 (2012), 468-477.  

[12] Ferschke, O., Howley, I., Tomar, G., Yang, D. and Ros\'e 
CP. Fostering Discussion across Communication Media in 
Massive Open Online Courses. In Proceedings of the 11th 
International Conference on Computer Supported 
Collaborative Learning. (Gothenburgh, Sweden), 2015, 459-
466. 

[13] Fortunato, S. Community detection in graphs. Physics 
Reports, 486, 3 (2010), 75-174. 

[14] Gillani, N. and Eynon, R. Communication patterns in 
massively open online courses. The Internet and Higher 
Education, 23, 10 (2014), 18-26.  



[15] Gillani, N., Yasseri, T., Eynon, R. and Hjorth, I. Structural 
limitations of learning in a crowd: communication 
vulnerability and information diffusion in MOOCs. Scientific 
Reports, 4 (Sep. 2014), 6447. 

[16] Glenda S. Stump, Jennifer DeBoer, Jonathan Whittinghill, 
Lori Breslow. Development of a Framework to Classify 
MOOC Discussion Forum Posts: Methodology and 
Challenges. Available online: 
https://tll.mit.edu/sites/default/files/library/Coding_a_MOOC_Discu
ssion_Forum.pdf. 02/04/2015. 

[17] Han, L., Kashyap, A. L., Finin, T., Mayfield, J. and Weese, J. 
UMBC_EBIQUITY-CORE: Semantic Textual Similarity 
Systems. In Proceedings of the Second Joint Conference on 
Lexical and Computational Semantics, Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 2013. 

[18] Harrer, A. and Schmidt, A. An Approach for the 
Blockmodeling in Multi-Relational Networks. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in 
Social Networks Analysis and Mining, (Istanbul, Turkey) 
IEEE, 2012, 591-598. 

[19] Harrer, A., Zeini, S. and Sabrina Ziebarth. Visualisation of 
the Dynamics for Longitudinal Analysis of Computer-
mediated Social Networks - Concept and Exemplary Cases. 
In From Sociology to Computing in Social Networks. Theory, 
Foundations and Applications. Springer, Vienna, 2010. 

[20] Hecking, T,, Harrer, A., Hoppe, H.U. Uncovering the 
Structure of Knowledge Exchange in a MOOC Discussion 
Forum. In Anonymous Proceedings of the International 
Conference of Advances in Social Network Analysis and 
Mining. (Paris, France). IEEE, 2015, in press. 

[21] Huang, J., Dasgupta, A., Ghosh, A., Manning, J. and 
Sanders, M. Superposter Behavior in MOOC Forums. In 
Proceedings of the First ACM Conference on Learning @ 
Scale Conference. (Atlanta, Georgia, USA). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA 2014, 117-126. 

[22] Kim, S. N., Wang, L. and Baldwin, T. Tagging and Linking 
Web Forum Posts. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth 
Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning. 
(Uppsala, Sweden). Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2010, 192-202. 

[23] Kizilcec, R. F., Schneider, E., Cohen, G. L. and McFarland, 
D. A. Encouraging Forum Participation in Online Courses 
with Collectivist, Individualist and Neutral Motivational 
Framings. Proceedings of the European MOOCs Stakeholder 
Summit, (Lausanne, Swizerland), 2014. 

[24] Liu, W., Kidzinski, L. and Dillenbourg, P. Semi-automatic 
annotation of MOOC forum posts. In Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Conference on Smart Learning Environments. 
(Sinaia, Romania), 2015. 

[25] Lorrain, F. and White, H. C. Structural equivalence of 
individuals in social networks. The Journal of mathematical 
sociology, 1, 1 (1971), 49-80. 

[26] Malzahn, N., Harrer, A. and Zeini, S. The Fourth Man - 
Supporting self-organizing group formation in learning 
communities. In Proceedings of the Computer Supported 
Collaborative Learning Conference 2007. (New Brunswick, 
NJ, USA). ICLS, 2007, 547-550. 

[27] ” Duinn, P. and Bridge, D. Collective Classification of Posts 
to Internet Forums. In Case-Based Reasoning Research and 
Development LNCS 8765 (2014), 330-344.  

[28] Onah, D. F., Sinclair, J., Boyatt, R. and Foss, J. G. Massive 
open online courses: learner participation. In Proceeding of 
the 7th International Conference of Education, Research and 
Innovation. (Seville, Spain). IATED Academy, 2014, 2348-
2356. 

[29] Rabbany, R., Takaffoli, M. and Zaiane, O. R. Analyzing 
participation of students in online courses using social 
network analysis techniques. In Proceedings of educational 
data mining. (Eindhoven, The Netherlands), 2011, 21-30. 

[30] RosÈ Carolyn P, Goldman, P., Zoltners Sherer, J. and 
Resnick, L. Supportive technologies for group discussion in 
MOOCs. Current Issues in Emerging eLearning, 2, 1 (2015), 
5. 

[31] Rossi, L. A. and Gnawali, O. Language independent analysis 
and classification of discussion threads in Coursera MOOC 
forums. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference 
on Information Reuse and Integration, (Redwood City, CA, 
USA), 2014, 654-661. 

[32] Rossi, R. A. and Ahmed, N. K. Role Discovery in Networks. 
CoRR, abs/1405.7134 (2014). 

[33] Sharif, A. and Magrill, B. Discussion Forums in MOOCs. 
International Journal of Learning, Teaching and 
Educational Research, 12, 1 (2015). 

[34] White, D. R. and Reitz, K. P. Graph and semigroup 
homomorphisms on networks of relations. Social Networks, 
5, 2 (1983), 193-234. 

[35] Wong, J., Pursel, B., Divinsky, A. and Jansen, B. An 
Analysis of MOOC Discussion Forum Interactions from the 
Most Active Users. In Social Computing, Behavioral-
Cultural Modeling, and Prediction  LNCS 9021, (2015), 
452-457. 

[36] Yang, D., Wen, M., Kumar, A., Xing, E. P. and Rose, C. P. 
Towards an integration of text and graph clustering methods 
as a lens for studying social interaction in MOOCs. The 
International Review of Research in Open and Distributed 
Learning, 15, 5 (2014). 

[37] Ziberna, A. Generalized blockmodeling of sparse networks. 
Metodolozkizvezki, 10, (2013), 99-119. 

 

 



