
Analysis of Dynamic Resource Access Patterns 

in a Blended Learning Course 
 

Tobias Hecking 
University of Duisburg-Essen 

Lotharstraße 63/65 
47048 Duisburg, Germany 

hecking@collide.info 

Sabrina Ziebarth 
University of Duisburg-Essen 

Lotharstraße 63/65 
47048 Duisburg, Germany 

ziebarth@collide.info 

H. Ulrich Hoppe 
University of Duisburg-Essen 

Lotharstraße 63/65 
47048 Duisburg, Germany 

hoppe@collide.info 

 

ABSTRACT 
This paper presents an analysis of resource access patterns in a 

recently conducted master level university course. The specialty 

of the course was that it followed a new teaching approach by 

providing additional learning resources such as wikis, self-tests 

and videos. To gain deeper insights into the usage of the provided 

learning material we have built dynamic bipartite student – 

resource networks based on event logs of resource access. These 

networks are analysed using methods adapted from social network 

analysis. In particular we uncover bipartite clusters of students 

and resources in those networks and propose a method to identify 

patterns and traces of their evolution over time.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human Factors; K.3.1 

[Computer Uses in Education]: collaborative learning; H.4.2 

[Types of Systems]: Decision support 

General Terms 
Algorithms, Experimentation, Theory, Measurement 

Keywords 
Learning resources, MOOCs, social network analysis, learning 

analytics 

1. INTRODUCTION 
In this study we investigate the student-resource interactions in a 

course that was recently conducted using Moodle as a learning 

management system (LMS). Whereas in previous instances of the 

same lecture the LMS was only used to distribute lecture slides 

and exercise assignments, this course followed a new teaching 

approach inspired by the concept of massive open online courses 

(MOOCs). It takes up elements of both xMOOCs and cMOOCs 

[5]the supply of lecture videos, reading materials, weekly online 

exercises and discussion forums as well as collaborative activities 

such as the production of a glossary in Wiki format with group 

writing and peer reviewing activities. These collaborative online 

activities completely replaced the previous presence-based and 

quite teacher-centric exercise. The course was not opened to the 

outside, thus there was no “massification” beyond the expected 

audience of about 40 students  from three M.Sc. programs, all 

related to computer science and interactive media. Since it was 

our first experience with a course declared as a “lecture” (and not, 

e.g., a project)  having such a strong emphasis on collaborative 

online activities and electronic material, we were particularly 

interested in analyzing how the participants made use of the 

additional learning resources and how this influenced 

collaboration and participation in the course. Therefore network 

analysis methods were used to investigate the dynamics of 

relations between students and resources and to identify 

characteristic patterns of the course. The main research questions 

are:  

? Do students use content produced by others? 
? Which resources are important for which students? 
? How do the relations between students and learning 

resources evolve over time? 

? Are there differences between students of different 
study programmes who attended the lecture? 

According to the theme of the LAK’14 conference,” Intersection 

of learning analytics research, theory and practice”, the 

contributions of this paper are twofold: First, a new method is 

introduced to the field of learning analytics that can be applied to 

identify and trace clusters of students and resources over time. 

Second, we use analytic methods to generate insights into the 

resource usage in lectures enriched with additional learning 

elements inspired by MOOCs.  

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the 

theoretical background concerning the role of learning resources 

and activities in general and more specific in the context of online 

learning. Section 3 describes the design of the analysed university 

course. In section 4 we introduce our analysis methods, before we 

explain the analysis of the mentioned learning course. Section 6 

concludes the main results and gives an outline of possible future 

research directions. 

 

2. BACKGROUND 
Online learning environments and their ability to facilitate 

distributed learning activities enable a wide variety of course 

designs especially in academic education. Massive Open Online 

Courses (MOOCs) constitute a current trend in practical 

applications of technology-enhanced learning. Because of the 

large number of participants in such online courses the personal 

supervision of learners by teachers is not possible. Hence, lessons 

are given as video lectures and exercises consist of online 

 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 

not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 

copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 

honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 

republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 

Permissions@acm.org.  

LAK '14, March 24 - 28 2014, Indianapolis, IN, USA 

Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2664-3/14/03$15.00. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567574.2567584 

 

173



quizzes/tests that can be automatically evaluated and other tasks 

which are reviewed by peers [3]. While in xMOOCs students 

mainly act as consumers of predefined learning contents, 

connectivist MOOCs (cMOOCs) as introduced by G. Siemens and 

S. Downs (c.f. [5]) focus on the production and sharing of 

knowledge artefacts like blog or wiki articles by and between 

learners [20]. Apart from targeting a broad audience, the shift of 

learning activities into online environments can be of advantage 

even in smaller scale [4, 22]. Hence, in the overlap of pure online 

learning activities and presence lectures, hybrid approaches that 

are also called blended learning courses. These courses aim to 

combine the benefits of online learning and face-to-face sessions. 

Such course designs enable learners to consume learning 

resources, share and discuss results asynchronously and thus 

independently of time and any place, while still having presence 

events for community building and supervision [7]. Generally, 

resources of various types play an important role in course design 

regarding the support of autonomous learning.It has also been 

argued that due to the variety of media or delivery channels such 

courses are particularly suited to address the needs of different 

learner types [9].  

By investigating the relations between learners and learning 

resources, we expect to gain deeper insights into the function of 

the learning community. Hoppe et. al [13] introduced the concept 

of social-thematic navigation through the sharing of learner-

created “emerging learning objects”. In this view, relations 

between groups of learners induced by thematically related 

learning objects indicate learners with a common interest. The 

learners could interact indirectly mediated by those objects 

without necessarily having a person-to-person communication. 

Social network analysis methods have also been applied to 

networks of people and artefacts to support the evolution of a 

knowledge creating community in terms of identification of 

people with common interests as well as trend analysis [12]. The 

work presented in [21] evaluates data mining methods for 

resource usage of students in LMS including statistics, clustering 

and classification. However, most methods rely on static 

snapshots of the state of a learning course and are not able to 

capture the dynamic evolution over time. More recently, Kizilcec, 

Piech, and Schneider [14] discovered engagement patterns of 

learners in MOOCs based on their access to video lectures and 

assessments in order to classify the users into subpopulations.  

 

3. DESCRIPTION OF THE COURSE 
GILLS (“Gestaltung interaktiver Lehr- / Lernsysteme”, eng. 

“Design of interactive teaching and learning systems”) is a master 

level course at the Department of Computer Science and Applied 

Cognitive Science at the University of Duisburg-Essen (Germany) 

that focusses on user/task modelling and models of interactive and 

collaborative learning environments. It targets students from three 

Master programmes “Applied Computer Science”, “Interactive 

Media and Cognition”, “Computer Engineering” and can also be 

attended by higher education teacher students of computer 

science. The course is taught once per year with about forty 

participants. It consists of a weekly three hour lecture 

accompanied by a one hour exercises with weekly assignments. 

Probably due to the given schedule of the course, attendance in 

the exercise was typically lower than in the lecture and the 

willingness for active participation (i.e. presentation of results on 

the part of the students) was also low. Thus, in summer semester 

2013 the exercise was “virtualized”, i.e. the presence based 

activity was replaced by a combination of individual and group 

assignments with reporting back into the used Moodle1 platform. 

The plenary face-to-face setting of the lecture was used as a forum 

to take up and discuss results from the virtual exercise activities. 

The role of the lecture was redefined in the sense of providing 

orientation knowledge (“advance organizer”) and core definitions 

with a limited number of characteristic examples, leaving specific 

extensions to the virtual exercise activities. These lecture elements 

were provided as smaller thematic video clips, available on the 

platform. Evidently, this new approach was inspired by the 

concept of MOOCs and takes up elements of both xMOOCs and 

cMOOCs, however being neither massive nor open. 

The Moodle course contained one forum for announcements and 

one for questions and discussions of the participants. The students 

were asked to post questions relevant to the whole course in the 

forum rather than to write emails to the supervisors. Additionally, 

the forum was used to support group exercises. Furthermore, a 

wiki was introduced to build a glossary for repetition and exam 

preparation. A typical exercise regarding a wiki article consisted 

of one week of creating the initial version in a small group, one 

week of individually reading the articles of other groups as well as 

writing peer feedback and one week of revising the article in the 

original small group. Each group handled another topic enabling 

students to specialize regarding their interests. Thus, groups were 

formed by topic using Moodle’s choice activity, which was set up 

to ensure groups of similar size. Furthermore, students could see 

the choices of their peers to enable group formation and 

communication.  

Overall, the online exercises contained (per student): 

? Creating and revising four wiki articles in small groups 

? Two tasks regarding constructive problem solving and 
modelling (partially using external tools) in small 

groups 

? Writing peer reviews (as wiki comments) regarding the 
group results above (individual task) 

? Creating and extending a concept map regarding the 
topics of the first chapter using external tools (group 

task) 

? Three quizzes regarding the three main topics for self-
testing, which could be completed several times 

(individual task) 

? Creating own questions and sample solutions in a wiki 
with regard to the lecture topics (individual task) 

? Playing the serious game Matchballs [25] for training 
relations between important concepts of the lecture 

(individual task) 

To motivate students for participating in the online exercises, 

bonus points were introduced. 

The Moodle course contained the following types of resources: 

? Lecture videos 

? Lecture slides 

? Additional reading material like scientific papers 

? Assignments including self-test quizzes 

? Wiki articles 

? Forum discussions 
                                                                 

1 https://moodle.org/ 

174



 

4. ANALYSIS METHODS 
 

4.1 Building student – resource networks 
from students action logs 
Actor-resource networks are bipartite networks. In bipartite 

networks [23], also called “two-mode” networks, there exist two 

sets of vertices. Edges only occur between vertices of different 

sets. 

In the case of bipartite actor-resource networks one set of vertices 

represents actors who have connections to a second set of vertices 

which represent resources. In our study we investigate bipartite 

networks of students and learning resources over time. The 

networks are based on the students’ activities within the learning 

management system Moodle. The relations of students and 

resources can be observed by event logs of resource access. 

Whenever a student accesses a resource, e.g. opens a lecture 

video, an event is generated and stored in the Moodle database. 

These event logs contain the id of the student, the name, and id of 

the resource as well as the timestamp of the event.  

Based on these log files a time series of bipartite student-resource 

networks can be extracted by sliding a specified time window 

over the stream of resource access events. Each network of the 

series (time slice) contains all relations between students and 

resources that occurred within the corresponding time window. 

 

4.2 Clustering of student - resource networks  
Actors in evolving social networks usually develop a community 

structure. This means that certain subsets of actors tend to be more 

densely connected to each other than to outsiders [2, 24]. 

The detection of such cohesive subgroups or subcommunities of 

actors in a social network is a common task in social network 

analysis [6]. Subcommunity detection methods can partition a 

graph into disjoint sets of nodes while maximizing the modularity 

between clusters [8]. Other methods do not cluster all nodes 

exhaustively and allow overlaps between clusters where nodes 

cannot be assigned to a subgroup uniquely. A prominent example 

for methods that detect overlapping subgroups is the Clique 

Percolation Method (CPM) [18] 

In this study, however, we investigate bipartite graphs where 

people are connected to resources they accessed during a certain 

period of time. In such actor - resource networks it is also possible 

to identify densely connected substructures. Thus, a bipartite 

subgroup, also called bipartite cluster, is a bipartite subgraph 

where a set of actors is more densely connected to a set of 

resources than to resources outside the cluster. Since the bulk of 

learning resources provided to the students (see section 3), we 

expect to find those clusters of students and learning resources 

also in the time slices of the evolving student – resource network. 

This can help to understand which students are interested in which 

resources, and how such affiliations change over time. 

In comparison to clusters in one-mode networks a bipartite cluster 

         consists of two parts, namely a set of actors   
             and a set of resources               . Figure 1 
shows the difference between clusters in one-mode and two-mode 

networks. For example the orange bipartite cluster in the bottom 

part of the figure contains the actor group 

                                      and the 
resource group                    . In contrast to 

subgroup detection in one-mode social networks, where social ties 

between actors are directly observable, the actors within a 

bipartite actor - resource cluster are not necessarily connected by 

social relations. Moreover the actors share a common interest in 

or awareness of the events of the bipartite cluster. In the following 

the set of actors in a bipartite cluster is called “actor group of the 

cluster” and the set of resources “resource group of the cluster”.  

Figure 1: Comparison of traditional clustering of a one-mode 

social network and a bipartite clustering of an actor – 

resource network. The node shapes indicate different node 

types. 

                      

The methods for subgroup detection in one-mode networks 

mentioned above cannot be applied to identify bipartite subgroups 

without modification.  

The Biclique Communities method [15] is an adaption of the 

Clique Percolation method [18] for bipartite networks. The 

method relies on the definition of a      biclique. This is a 
maximal connected bipartite subgraph with   nodes of the first 
mode and   nodes of the second mode. Thus, if a set of   actors 
all are connected to each of   resources, they form a      biclique. 
A bipartite subgroup also called biclique community in [15] is 

defined as the union of a series of adjacent      bicliques.  

 

 

Figure 2: Example of two adjacent      bicliques. First clique: 

{A, B, 1, 2}, second clique: {B, C, 2, 3}. 

175



Two      bicliques are adjacent, if they share at least     nodes 
of the first mode and     nodes of the second mode. Figure 2 
depicts an example of two adjacent      bicliques. 

4.3 Detection of evolution patterns in student 
– resource networks 
The analysis of a static snapshots of a social networks or actor  – 

resource networks can give various insights into their structure 

[23]. However, since the most networks evolve over time, the 

community structure also changes. In section 4.1 the 

transformation of event logs of resource accesses into subsequent 

snapshots (time slices) of an evolving bipartite network has been 

described. It is likely that a subgroup detection method will 

uncover different subgroups in each of the time slices. Since 

subgroups do not appear and disappear at random, there can be 

similar subgroups in consecutive time slices. This phenomenon 

has recently been studied in social network analysis [16, 17]. In 

social networks a group of people may stay in contact for a certain 

period of time. There can be new members joining the group or 

other members can leave the group at certain points in time but 

there is a stable majority that is considered as the same subgroup 

over several points in time. In such situations one can speak of the 

same subcommunity with different instances in different time 

slices or snapshots of a dynamic network.  

Palla, Barabasi and Vicsek define six basic life cycle events for 

subcommunities in one-mode social networks [17]. These events 

are:  

? Birth: A subcommunity is identified the first time. 

? Growth:  A subcommunity acquires new members but is 
core stays the same. 

? Contraction: A subcommunity loses members over time. 

? Merge: The members of distinct subgroups merge to 
one subgroup at later point in time. 

? Split: One subcommunity splits into two new born sub-
communities. 

? Death: A subcommunity disappears over time. 
In bipartite networks of students and learning resources one may 

also find patterns of the evolution of student – resource clusters. 

The difference to one-mode networks is that in bipartite networks 

the previously described events can happen to the actor and 

resource groups of the bipartite clusters separately. By applying a 

bipartite subgroup detection method to different slices of an 

evolving student – resource network, one can identify traces of 

dynamically evolving actor groups and resource groups. Figure 3 

depicts an example of such traces. Each group of actors, in our 

case students, forms a bipartite cluster with a group of resources at 

a point in time. According to the change of affiliations of students 

to resources the detected bipartite clusters can change over time. 

However, similar actor groups or student groups can be detected 

over time as part of different bipartite clusters. Thus one can 

identify relations between similar actor or resource groups of 

subsequent time slices. Table 1 shows those relations which allow 

the tracing of actor and resource groups over time which results in 

a timeline as in Figure 3. 

 

Tracing the evolution of dynamic actor and resource groups 

Given a list of subsequent time slices of k evolving actor-resource 

networks              the first step is to apply the Biclique 
Communities method described in section 4.2 to each of these 

graphs. The result is an ordered list of   sets of bipartite clusters 
(“biclique communities”) for the   time slices     

{             }    {             }      

{             } . As explained in section 4.2 each of the 

bipartite clusters                   contains an actor group and a 

resource group. In the context of the tracing algorithm the actor 

groups and resource groups of particular time slices are called 

“step actor groups” and “step resource groups” respectively. 

Similar step actor / resource groups occurring in subsequent time 

slices are assumed to be instances of the same dynamic group. 

Thus, a “dynamic actor group” is a timeline of similar actor 

groups and a “dynamic resource group” is a timeline of similar 

resource groups. Figure 3 depicts the traces of a dynamic actor 

and a resource group with step groups as particular instances. By 

tracing step groups of actors and resources over several time slices 

different life cycle events, or evolution patterns, of bipartite 

clusters can be identified (cf. Table 1).  

To identify the described events a method is needed that matches 

the step groups of the time slices with step groups of previous 

time slices. Although there are methods for tracing the evolution 

of dynamic subcommunities in one-mode social networks [1, 10, 

17], to our knowledge there are no such methods for bipartite 

networks that allow the identification of the evolutionary events in 

table 1. In the following, an adaption of the method of Green et. al 

[10] is introduced, which was originally designed for one-mode 

networks, to trace the subgroup structure in bipartite networks like 

learner resource networks: 

Initialization: 

The method maintains two sets of not matched groups, one for 

step actor groups (   ) and one for step resource groups (   ). 
At the beginning of the process, the set     is the set of step 
actor groups of the first time slice   (                   and 

    contains all step resource groups      {           } . 

Matching phase: 

After the initialization the algorithm precedes with the step groups 

of the next time slice   .  

The next step is to compute the similarity of the step actor groups 

of    with all step actor groups in     and the similarity of the 
step resource groups in    with the step resource groups in    . 
As in [10] and [17] the Jaccard coefficient is used as measure of 

similarity between two groups: 

         
|     |

|    |
 

 

 

Here,   and   are either two step actor groups or two step 
resource groups. If          exceeds a certain threshold, the 
groups will be matched.  

There are four different situations that can occur when matching 

the current step groups in    to the not matched step groups in 
    and     in     .  

1. One-to-one match between a step group of the current time 
slice and a previously not matched group in     or    : 

In this case the two groups belong to the same timeline of a 

dynamic group. In Figure 3 this is the case for the dynamic 

resource group   , which occurs in    and    . 

2. One-to-many match: One not previously matched group in 
     matches to more than one group of the current time slice 

  . This indicates that the not previously matched group 

176



splits up into the matched step groups of   . The matched 

step groups of    are than considered as the first occurrences 

of a new born dynamic group. In Figure 3the actor group 

     in timelice 1 matches with the two actor groups      and 

     which will then considered to be instances of new 

dynamic actor groups    and   . 

3. Many-to-one match: More than one not previously matched 
groups in     or     match to the same step group of   . 

This means that these groups merge to the matching group of 

  . The 4
th column of Table 1 is an example of such a 

situation. 

4. A step actor or step resource group of    cannot be matched 
to any of the groups in     or    . In this case such a 

group will be the first instance of a new born dynamic group. 

An example for this is the resource group      in Figure 3. 

After all step groups of the currently investigated time slice    
were checked, all groups from     and     which could be 
matched with one or more step groups of the currently 

investigated time slice    will be removed from these sets.  

All step groups of the current time slice    are then added to     
and     respectively. 

Then the algorithms moves on to the set of groups in the next time 

slice. The algorithm stops when the last time slice was processed. 

The result can then be visualized as a graph like in Figure 3.   

 

 

Figure 3: Traces of dynamic actor (green circles) and resource 

groups (orange squares) of bipartite clusters over time. 

 

Table 1: Possible events in bipartite cluster evolution over 

time. The nodes represent actor and resource groups 

respectively. The arrows points from an event or actor group 

to matching groups at a later point in time. Dotted lines 

between two groups indicate the same bipartite cluster. 

 

A group of actors and their 

affiliations to resources stays 

stable over subsequent steps in 

time. 

 

A group of actors shift their 

interest to new resources. 

 

A new group of actors A2 

forms around an existing set of 

resources. 

 

Groups A1 and A2 merge 

together and share their 

affiliations to resources. 

 

A group of actors A1 splits 

into two new groups and do 

not longer share their 

affiliations to resources. 

 

 

177



5. ANALYSIS OF THE BLENDED 
LEARNING COURSE 

 

5.1 General Analysis 
The first lecture of the GILLS course was visited by 48 students, 

of the 44 students doing the first exercise 40 regularly did their 

exercises till the end of the course and 36 did the oral exam. The 

Moodle course was frequently visited: There were 24 distinct 

students per day and 45 per week on average (see also Figure 4). 

The highest amount of distinct users per day was on lecture days 

and the lowest on weekends. The deadline for and assignment of 

new exercises was typically on lecture days, which may explain 

the high number of accesses on these days.  

 

 

Figure 4: Moodle usage over time 

 

Figure 5 shows the relations of students in the course based on 

group choices. The edge width indicates how often students were 

in the same group; the darker the edge, the stronger the relation. 

The node size represents the centrality of the students; the bigger 

a node, the more relations to other students. On the one hand, the 

network shows some groups of students often working together in 

the same constellation (in the periphery of the graph). These 

groups often consist of students of the same study programme. On 

the other hand, there are students without a stable affiliation who 

work with a high number of different students (in the center of the 

graph). These might be the ones choosing an exercise/group by 

topic rather than by social reasons. 

 

Figure 5: Student relations based on group choices 

5.2 Overlapping clusters of student and 
learning resources 
By applying the Biclique Community method (see section 4.2) to 

the student resource networks we generated from the resource 

access logs of the students, overlapping bipartite student – 

resource clusters were retrieved. Learning resources that 

frequently appear in overlaps between bipartite clusters may be of 

particular importance because students of different groups have 

relations to them. Students who cannot be assigned to bipartite 

clusters uniquely have a broader interest in learning resources 

than other students 

As a prototypical example for the bipartite clustering of students 

and resources, Figure 6 depicts the subgroup structure of the 

student resource network in the 10th week of the lecture period, 

where the topic was “Intelligent Tutoring Systems” and 

“Cognitive User Modeling”. The exercise assignment for this 

week was to create wiki articles on the topic. It is worth to 

mention that the applied Biclique Communites method for the 

clustering does not cluster the nodes in a network exhaustively. 

Nodes that do not belong to a      clique (see section 4.2) cannot 
belong to a cluster. Hence Figure 6 only shows those students and 

their relations to resources which are part of detected bipartite 

clusters. 

 

Figure 6: Overlapping bipartite subgroups in the 10th week of 

the lecture period. Black nodes are in multiple subgroups. 

 

The red cluster contains the wiki articles created in the previous 

week, thus the included students can be considered to have 

accessed them for creating peer reviews. This cluster overlaps 

highly with other clusters, since writing peer reviews was only 

part of the exercise. 

The second part was writing wiki articles on ITS (two week task). 

There were two articles on “Constrained Based Tutoring” (CBT) 

and two on “Model Tracing Tutors” (one on “Cognitive Tutors” 

and one on “Pseudo Tutors”). The green cluster focusses on 

resources (papers, slides and videos) regarding CBT. The blue 

cluster on the one hand contains resources regarding Model 

Tracing Tutors (papers, slides, videos) as well as some of the wiki 

articles which should be created (Cognitive Authoring Tool, 

Pseudo Tutor). On the other hand it contains some of the wiki 

articles (CTT, Heuristic Evaluation, Task Action Grammar) that 

had to be corrected in the previous week. Since the deadline of the 

old exercises and the assignment of new ones are on the same day, 

these old assignments are also considered in the data. 

The only resources in the orange cluster are videos of the first 

weeks of the lecture that are not directly connected to the topics of 

the considered time interval (week 10). Thus this cluster cannot be 

easily explained. One interpretation might be that the students 

178



already started with the repetition of the course. As can be seen in 

Figure 4 video resources play an important role for exam 

preparation. 

 

5.3 Resource access during the lecture period 
The resource access of the students is modelled as subsequent 

time slices of an evolving bipartite network. The size of the time 

slices is one week because so the resource access of the students 

during one lecture week is aggregated in one time slice. The first 

four weeks of the lecture period were skipped, because at this time 

there are not many resources accessible in the course. To identify 

bipartite subgroups in the time slices the Biclique Communities 

method described in section 4.2 was applied with the parameters 

    and    . This means that an uncovered subgroup 
contains at least   students and   resources. This choice is 
reasonable, since the most students share some common resources 

(e.g. lecture slides) and consequently smaller values lead to one 

big cluster in the most of the time slices. Larger values for   and   
have the effect that the most nodes cannot be clustered because 

they do not belong to a corresponding      biclique.   

The tracing algorithm described in section 4.3 requires a similarity 

threshold for the matching of subsequent step groups. This 

threshold was set to 0.3. This threshold is recommended in [10] 

for the tracing of one-mode clusters, but is also suitable for our 

method because it allows the detection of merges and splits of 

dynamic groups but is not too low so that matching between step 

groups occur at random. 

The results for the tracing of the bipartite clusters during the 

lecture period are depicted in Figure 7. For the visualization of the 

subgroup traces the swim lane visualization introduced in [11] 

was applied. The vertical lines connect step actor and step 

resource groups that match between two time steps respectively. 

The horizontal lines connect a step actor group (circle) with a step 

resource group (square), if they belong to the same bipartite 

cluster in the corresponding week. The node sizes correspond to 

the contained number of resources or students respectively.  

During the lecture period there is one big stable actor group (stud. 

group 1). This actor group forms different bipartite clusters every 

week with resource groups containing the core lecture material for 

the particular week as well as the wiki pages created by the 

exercise groups. This indicates that the students of this group are 

not only affiliated to the core material and the wiki content 

created by themselves, but also access the content created by the 

others. This can e.g. be seen in Figure 6, where the big blue 

bipartite cluster depicts the student group 1 in week 10 and their 

affiliations to course resources. Many students of the major 

student group 1 are also members of smaller actor groups at the 

same time. Not all of the smaller student groups correspond to the 

exercise groups that collaboratively edit wiki pages. Moreover the 

wiki pages are used by the majority of students across exercise 

groups. This can be an effect of the peer review exercises. The 

smaller groups mostly contain students with close relations to the 

additional learning material as well as lecture videos. Regarding 

the patterns described in table 1, this corresponds to the “stable 

group” pattern, described in the first row of table 1. Student group 

1 accesses similar sets of resources in week 6 and 7 and also in 

week 8 and 9. In these cases learning resources of the previous 

week are still of importance. This shows that the peer reviewing 

and wiki article revising exercises indeed encourage many of the 

students to occupy themselves with the course material of 

previous weeks.  However, the patterns of simultaneous merging 

or splitting of the actor groups and resource groups of bipartite 

clusters, described in row 4 and 5 of table 1, could not be found.  

 

Figure 7: Visualization of the subgroup evolution of the last 9 

weeks of the lecture period with interesting traces highlighted. 

 

 

5.4 Resource access during the exam 
preparation phase 
In contrast to the lecture period, the exam preparation is self-

organized. Thus, in this period the students choose the resources 

they need for their exam preparations based on their own schedule 

and assessment.  

Relevant questions regarding the exam preparation are:  

? Which resources are often used by certain groups of 
students during preparations?  

? What are typical traces of actor groups and resource 
groups in such informal settings? 

Our method can help to answer these questions in order to provide 

students with additional resources before the exam and to identify 

those combinations of resources that are considered as relevant by 

the students.  

Figure 9 depicts the traces of bipartite student resource clusters 

during the exam phase. The parameter settings for the subgroup 

detection and the tracing algorithm are the same as in section 5.3. 

However the size of the time slices is only four days instead of 

179



one week as in 5.3. This is due to the more dynamic resource 

access during the exam preparation phase.  

There is one big cluster of learning resources, namely resource 

group 1. This dynamic resource group is relatively stable. That 

means there is a set of learning resources which is of particular 

importance to the students for exam preparations. The different 

step resource groups of this dynamic resource group contain the 

primarily lecture slides especially on the topics CSCL, CSCW and 

Intelligent Tutoring Systems, which are the last topics of the 

lecture that are relevant for the exam. The majority of these step 

groups also contain self-test quizzes. There is also a relatively 

stable actor group with step actor groups that often form a 

bipartite cluster with particular instances of resource group 1. This 

indicates that the resources of within this resource group are 

considered as most relevant by a large group of students in the 

days and weeks before the exam. As in the lecture period, the 

found clusters overlap pervasively. Learning resources that occur 

more than two times in more than one cluster are: 

? Lecture slides “CSCL” 

? Lecture slides “knowledge diagnosis” 

? Wiki article “methods and models for human computer 
interaction”. 

? Wiki article “Fitts’ law” 
These resources are used by students irrespectively of the other 

resources they use for exam preparation.  

Between points in time 6, 7, 8, 9, 11 and 12 no clusters can be 

found. Resources are only accessed by single persons 

sporadically. This can also be observed in Figure 4 between week 

15 and 20. This can be explained by the scheduling of the oral 

exams. While the most students had their oral exams in the four 

weeks after the lecture period, a smaller group of another study 

programme had exams after eight weeks. Students of the second 

study programme seem to start with exam preparations on earliest 

eight days before the exam. This is much less time than students 

of the first exam period spend for preparation. Regarding the 

exam results, students from the first group tend to get better 

grades (1.3 on average) than students from the second group (2.1 

on average). Furthermore, the resources accessed by the second 

group are different in the beginning of their active phase. Instead 

of a dominating group of students that mainly access the lecture 

slides for exam preparation as the students in the beginning of the 

exam phase, the active students in the late phase of the exam 

period can be clustered into small overlapping groups which are 

either affiliated to wiki articles or lecture videos, see Figure 8. In 

the last time slice most of the students merge to a single group, 

but instead forming a bipartite cluster with mostly wiki and video 

resources, which would correspond to the merging pattern of the 

4th column of table 1, they refocus their learning interest to the 

“core” preparation material (res. group 1) as can be seen in Figure 

9.  

 

Figure 8: The student-resource clusters in time slice 13 of the 

exam preparation phase. 

 

 

Figure 9: The evolution of the bipartite subgroups during the 

oral examination phase. 

6. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
The analysis of the GILLS course using the proposed methods has 

provided us with some useful insights concerning the patterns of 

resource usage of the students. By tracing the bipartite student-

resource clusters over time during the lecture period, it turns out 

that the majority of the students behave similar. In every week 

they access the lecture slides assigned to the topic of that week 

and the wiki articles written by other students. Especially the 

180



continuous interest in wiki articles created by other students 

indicates that the peer review concept does work appropriately. As 

described in section 3, the students can earn bonus points for the 

exam when they do the group exercises, namely writing and 

reviewing wiki articles. The good quality of glossary articles is 

indicated by our findings that the articles were used across 

exercise groups and in addition to the lecture slides for reworking 

the lecture. Some groups of students who often overlap with the 

major student group are additionally interested in additionally 

provided scientific articles or the lecture videos. Lecture videos 

often occur in small bipartite student resource clusters as in Figure 

6. Thus, they seem to be used on demand by small groups of 

students as additional learning resources or to rework a presence 

lecture they had not attended.  

During the exam preparation phase we discovered a set of core 

learning resources that are accessed by a more or less stable group 

of students. By investigating the overlaps between the student-

resource clusters it is possible to identify a small set of learning 

material that was being used also by more than one group of 

students, see section 5.4. For future instances of the GILLS 

course, the course designers should further investigate the role of 

these learning materials particularly for exam preparation.  

As described in section 5.1 students tend to work with students of 

their own study programme. In section 5.4 the analysis results 

show that the students of the study programme, for which oral 

exams were scheduled later than the exams for the other 

programmes, have also different patterns of resource access 

during the exam preparation phase. They start preparation late and 

are much more focused on lecture videos and wiki articles than 

the others. In the future we can tailor the course more specifically 

to those distinct learner types. 

From the methodological point of view, this paper presented a 

modification of the subcommunity tracing method for one-mode 

social networks described in [10], so that it can be used to trace 

clusters in bipartite networks. The utility of this kind of analysis 

for the discovery of characteristic properties of the relations 

between students and learning resources was demonstrated. A 

major advantage of the proposed analysis in contrast to pure 

descriptive analysis of resource access is that one can not only 

identify popular and hence potential useful resources, but also 

who is affiliated to these resources, and how such affiliations 

change over time.  

In our further work based on this methodology, we consider 

several other applications: In cMOOC-like environments or open 

learning platforms such as Khan Academy2 where users are more 

or less free in the resources they choose, the tracing of dynamic 

learner-resource networks can help to identify learners with 

similar learning traces and similar interests. The result could be 

used for peer recommendation as in [12]. In blended learning 

scenarios, where learning activities take place in the real world as 

well as in virtual environments, student groups based on resource 

access that are stable over time can be an indicator for group work 

in the real world. Research on this can help to develop tools for 

better course management in those scenarios. The described 

method does not only provide structural information about 

learners and their relations to learning resources. Moreover it 

reflects learning processes. In environments with predefined 

resource access like linear lectures or scenario based inquiry 

learning settings; the method can help to verify if students use 

resources as intended. Questions like: “Are the right resources are 

                                                                 

2 https://www.khanacademy.org/ 

accessed at the right time by the right group of students?” can be 

answered. 

 

7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Alfredo Ramos for the implementation of 

the visualization tools that were used to create the most of the 

network visualizations in this paper. 

 

8. REFERENCES 

[1] Asur, S., Parthasarathy, S. and Ucar, D. An event-based 
framework for characterizing the evolutionary behavior of 

interaction graphs. ACM Trans.Knowl.Discov.Data, 3, 4 

(Dec 2009), 16:1-16:36. DOI=10.1145/1631162.1631164. 

[2] Backstrom, L., Huttenlocher, D., Kleinberg, J. and Lan, X. 
Group formation in large social networks: membership, 

growth, and evolution. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM 

SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery 

and data mining. (Philadelphia, PA, USA). ACM, New 

York, NY, USA, 2006, 44-54. 

[3] Belanger, Y. and Thornton, J. Bioelectricity: A Quantitative 
Approach Duke University’s First MOOC. Duke Space 
Library. Duke University. 10 March 2013 (2013). 

[4] Bruff, D. O., Fisher, D. H., McEwen, K. E. and Smith, B. E. 
Wrapping a MOOC: Student Perceptions of an Experiment in 

Blended Learning. Journal of Online Learning & Teaching, 

9, 2 (2013). 

[5] Fini, A. The technological dimension of a massive open 
online course: The case of the CCK08 course tools. The 

International Review Of Research In Open And Distance 

Learning, 10, 5 (2009). 

[6] Fortunato, S. Community detection in graphs. Physics 
Reports, 486, 3 (2010), 75-174. 

[7] Garrison, D. R. and Kanuka, H. Blended learning: 
Uncovering its transformative potential in higher education. 

The internet and higher education, 7, 2 (2004), 95-105. 

[8] Girvan, M. and Newman, M. E. J. Community structure in 
social and biological networks. Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences, 99, 12 (2002), 7821-7826. 

DOI=10.1073/pnas.122653799. 

[9] Grünewald, F., Meinel, C., Totschnig, M. and Willems, C. 
Designing MOOCs for the Support of Multiple Learning 

Styles. In Scaling up Learning for Sustained Impact. 

Springer, 8095, (2013), 371-382. 

[10] Greene, D., Doyle, D. and Cunningham, P. Tracking the 
Evolution of Communities in Dynamic Social Networks. In 

Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in 

Social Network Analysis and Mining, (2010), 176-183.  

[11] Halatchliyski, I., Hecking, T., Göhnert, T. and Hoppe, H. U. 
Analyzing the flow of ideas and profiles of contributors in an 

open learning community. In Proceedings of the Third 

International Conference on Learning Analytics and 

Knowledge. (Leuven, Belgium). ACM, New York, NY, 

USA, 2013, 66-74. 

[12] Harrer, A., Malzahn, N., Zeini, S. and Hoppe, H. U. 
Combining social network analysis with semantic relations to 

support the evolution of a scientific community. In 

181



Anonymous Proceedings of the 8th iternational conference 

on Computer supported collaborative learning. (New 

Brunswick, New Jersey, USA). International Society of the 

Learning Sciences, 2007, 270-279. 

[13] Hoppe, U., Pinkwart, N., Oelinger, M., Zeini, S., Verdejo, F., 
Barros, B. and Mayorga, J. I. Building bridges within 

learning communities through ontologies and thematic 

objects. In Anonymous Proceedings of the 2005 conference 

on Computer support for collaborative learning: learning 

2005: the next 10 years! (Taipei, Taiwan). International 

Society of the Learning Sciences, 2005, 211-220. 

[14] Kizilcec, R. F., Piech, C. and Schneider, E. Deconstructing 
disengagement: analyzing learner subpopulations in massive 

open online courses. In Anonymous Proceedings of the Third 

International Conference on Learning Analytics and 

Knowledge. (Leuven, Belgium). ACM, New York, NY, 

USA, 2013, 170-179. 

[15] Lehmann, S., Schwartz, M. and Hansen, L. K. Biclique 
communities. Phys Rev E., 78, 1 (Jul 2008), 016108. 

DOI=10.1103/PhysRevE.78.016108. 

[16] Leskovec, J., Kleinberg, J. and Faloutsos, C. Graphs over 
time: densification laws, shrinking diameters and possible 

explanations. In Anonymous Proceedings of the eleventh 

ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge 

discovery in data mining. (Chicago, Illinois, USA). ACM, 

New York, NY, USA, 2005, 177-187. 

[17] Palla, G., Barabasi, A. L. and Vicsek, T. Quantifying social 
group evolution. Nature, 446, 7136 (2007), 664-667. 

[18] Palla, G., Derenyi, I., Farkas, I. and Vicsek, T. Uncovering 
the overlapping community structure of complex networks in 

nature and society. Nature, 435, 7043 (2005), 814-818. 

[19] Rodriguez, O. MOOCs and the AI-Stanford like Courses: 
two successful and distinct course formats for massive open 

online courses. European Journal of Open, Distance, and E-

Learning, (2012). 

[20] Rodriguez, O. The concept of openness behind c and x-
MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses). Open Praxis, 5, 1 

(2013), 67-73. 

[21] Romero, C., Ventura, S. and García, E. Data mining in 
course management systems: Moodle case study and tutorial. 

Comput. Educ., 51, 1 (8 2008), 368-384.  

[22] Waldrop, M. M. Online learning: Campus 2.0. Nature, 495, 
7440 (2013), 160-163. DOI=10.1038/495160a. 

[23] Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. Social Network Analysis: 
Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press, , 

1994. 

[24] Watts, D. J. and Strogatz, S. H. Collective dynamics of 
`small-world' networks. Nature, 393, 6684 (1998), 440-442. 

[25] Ziebarth, S., Malzahn, N. and Hoppe, H. U. Matchballs --- a 
multi-agent-system for ontology-based collaborative learning 

games. In Proceedings of the 18th international conference 

on Collaboration and Technology. (Raesfeld, Germany, ). 

Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, (2012), 208-222. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

182





