
Cooking with Learning Analytics Recipes 
Roope Jaakonmäki 

University of Liechtenstein 
roope.jaakonmaeki@uni.li 

 
Stefan Dietze 

University of Hannover 
dietze@l3s.de 

Hendrik Drachsler 
Open University of the Netherlands 

hendrik.drachsler@ou.nl 
 

Albrecht Fortenbacher 
HTW Berlin 

albrecht.fortenbacher@HTW-Berlin.de 

Michael Kickmeier-Rust 
TU Graz 

michael.kickmeier-rust@tugraz.at 
 

Ivana Marenzi 
University of Hannover 

marenzi@l3s.de 

ABSTRACT 
Learning Analytics is a melting pot for a multitude of research 
fields and origin of many developments about learning and its 
environment. There is a serious hype over the concepts of learning 
analytics, however, concrete solutions and applications are 
comparably scarce. Of course, data rich environments, such as 
MOOCs, come with statistical analytics dashboards, although the 
educational value is often limited. Practical solutions for scenarios 
in data-lean environments or for small-scale organizations are 
rarely adopted. The LA4S project is dedicated to gather practical 
solutions, provide a tool box for practitioners, and publish a cook 
book with concrete learning analytics recipes for everyone. 

CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing?Education 

Keywords 
Learning Analytics; Applications; Solutions; Cookbook; Recipes 

1. INTRODUCTION 
The community of Learning Analytics (LA) research is rapidly 
growing and gaining more and more facets of research, 
applications, and theoretical contributions [2]. There is a 
substantial hype of the concept [3] and LA has become a melting 
pot for contributions of various scientific disciplines such as 
Educational Science, Data Science, Legal and Ethical Science, 
Management Science and various subfields of those. 
LA supports the measurement, analysis and reporting of data 
about learners and their contexts for purposes of understanding 
and optimizing learning and the environments in which it occurs 
(statement on Learning Analytics and Knowledge from the 1st 
International Conference in 2011). LA focuses on learning and 
teaching activities in digital supported learning environments. As 
such, it enables making learning and teaching situations more 
transparent for both learners and teachers. 
Making education more transparent enables to receive feedback 
and status reports about your own learning or teaching track, and 
identify indicators of how the learning and teaching processes 
could be monitored and improved. Hence, the quality of learning 
and teaching processes will be easier to improve by collecting 
data (e.g. from learning management systems, or MOOCs) and 
information about the learners and educators, and by 

implementing methods (e.g. social network analysis, process 
mining, student performance regressions) that help to attain LA 
objectives (e.g. estimating students skills, visualizing learning 
paths, monitoring or predicting student performance). In addition, 
there might be multiple ways to achieve LA objectives that one 
might not be aware of. 
In practice, implementing sophisticated LA solutions often 
requires high-level knowledge and skills on areas, such as 
machine learning, natural language processing, and data mining, 
processing, analysis, and interpretation [4]. This challenges 
especially individuals in smaller size universities, who would like 
to undertake LA initiatives to improve parts of learning or 
teaching actions, but are lacking of the core skills, knowledge, or 
resources. Nevertheless, even before having a clear vision, 
making big investments, or implementing a specific LA strategy, 
these educators might also benefit from trying out some LA 
solutions, and help them to decide if LA could be helpful for them 
in their cause. 
Moreover, although LA has been around for almost six years now, 
most LA strategies are still on initial phases when considered the 
five step sophistication model of LA developed by the Society of 
Learning Analytics Research (SoLAR) [4]. The challenge is to 
first make educators aware of LA, and then offer them required 
information and tools to start experimenting with. The lack of 
know-how and resources prevents these stakeholders to start 
experimenting with their own LA initiatives and making solution 
more mature and applicable. 
LA bears great potential and provides solutions to the heavily 
challenged field of education (which is particularly true for K12 
or K18 education). In general, gathering and analyzing digital 
traces from various learning environments enables to describe 
what is happening, explain why something is happening, and 
predict when something might be happening in certain learning 
situations. Hence, by visualizing these teaching and training 
situations, they will become much more transparent. In addition, 
LA also enables to adapt teaching better to the needs of the 
students, and helps in identifying individual key performance 
indicators for learning processes. The challenge is to make these 
possibilities available for everyone, including educators, 
researchers, university administrators, and others interested in the 
field who are lacking the required resources. 
Probably there are many potential stakeholders, who could be 
interested in implementing LA solutions, but they don’t know 
how to start with LA in the first place. Recent LA research offers 
many examples and use cases how to enhance digital learning, 
teaching, and training at various levels, but the challenge is to 
generate approaches that would bring LA closer to educators, 
researchers, university administrators, and others interested in the 
field who don’t have the required resources. Currently, the 
existing LA does not adequately address this problem. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, 
contact the Owner/Author.  

Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029465 



What we see in practice is that a large number of practitioners are 
craving for realistic, practical, simple, and meaningful solutions 
that meet the requirements of their daily practice, and that address 
major hurdles (ranging from the need to record a solid data basis 
to the need to fulfill privacy and data protection requirements). 
Hence, the question is how to support the implementation of LA 
initiatives in small, partially low-fidelity and perhaps data-lean 
environments, so that they could also improve the quality and 
measurement of the teaching and learning activities they are 
involved with.  

2. LA4S APPROACH 
For the mission of support practitioners, we initiated “LA4S - 
Learning Analytics and Learning Process Management for Small 
Size Organizations in Higher Education” project, which aims at 
bringing more discussion to this transdisciplinary effort, and 
endeavors to find an approach how to provide small educational 
organizations with an access and knowledge about LA tools, 
methods, and datasets. The main objectives of this project are to 
integrate already carried out experiences in the LA research field, 
and transfer innovations from the field into the area of small size 
higher education institutions with an aim to lower the threshold to 
build up own LA experiences, for example, as a teacher, or a 
university administrator. In addition, we aim at advancing the 
field of LA by showcasing the latest results, methodologies, tools, 
strategies, and models for this targeted audience. This will 
encompass theoretical discussions as well as practical examples 
and strategies for the implementation of LA in a classroom, a 
department, or an institution. 

To effectively gather, summarize, realize, and disseminate 
practical solutions, the consortium consists of strong LA research 
partners such as the Open University of the Netherlands, the 
Technical University of Graz, the University of Hannover, and the 
University of Applied Science Berlin. The consortium is led by 
the University of Liechtenstein. All partners have LA solutions 
that shall be brought into practice; first by deriving an 
understanding of the state of the art in LA research and practice 
from a LAK Dataset corpus, which offers a near-complete corpus 
of LA and EDM research throughout the last 7 years [1]. Based on 
the existing literature, we compose a relevant information package 
to introduce the educators to LA, and the important related topics 
concerning ethics, privacy, and essential theoretical approaches. 

Thereafter, we compile solutions that enable to try out different 
LA approaches, while presenting them in an easy and appealing 
way. We call these LA solutions (similar to use cases) LA recipes. 
With a wide range of complete and easily understandable recipes 
for LA, all interested chefs are able to start cooking without 
previous expertise in the field or investing on LA platforms and 
software. In more detail, the ultimate task is to provide relevant 
ingredients, methods, and kitchenware that a good LA analytics 
cook requires. For this cause, it is important to bring together all 
LA researchers and leverage their knowledge to boost education 
in an area that is highly important for the whole educational field.  

3. LEARNING ANALYTICS COOK BOOK 
The result of our research will be a cook book, with a 
complementary toolbox web site, that will be ready to use in 
different educational institutions, and in different educational 
environments. The purpose of this cook book is to disseminate 
knowledge for a wide group of stakeholders, especially targeting 
educators with limited experience in learning analytics. Besides 
focusing on the analysis of learning processes, the cook book also 
puts emphasis on ethical issues of learning analytics, as well as on 

data privacy and data protection, which are critical issues when 
implementing learning analytics in any educational institution. 
The information will be disseminated in the form of a cook book, 
which consists of a set of recipes, accompanied by an introduction 
into specific topics of learning analytics, and a toolbox. 
A learning analytics recipe is meant to solve a specific task, e.g. 
showing the activity of students with respect to a given learning 
task. Examples for recipes are the usage of the visual tool 
LEMO21 within a Moodle course, or the tool DojoIBL2 for 
inquiry-based learning.  
Each recipe first describes the objectives of this specific 
“cooking”, including information on the difficulty of the task and 
the level of expertise needed. The section “ingredients” lists 
prerequisites and requirements, which could be necessary data, 
technologies or methods to be applied. The core of each recipe 
consists of a sequence of steps how to accomplish the goal. 
Finally, scenarios are presented in which this recipe can be 
applied. 
The introductory part of the cook book focuses on special topics 
of learning analytics which are relevant for a better understanding 
of the recipes, or just important information if an educational 
institution wants to implement learning analytics. Examples of 
topics are linked data, ethics for learning analytics, learning paths 
or prediction of learners’ success. The toolbox is a supplement to 
the cook book and contains links to learning analytics tools and 
systems, to guides for users and best practice examples. The cook 
book offers comprehensive and easy-to-implement solutions for 
learning analytics needs, which has the potential to boost 
education in small-size educational organizations which do not 
have many resources to implement learning analytics. 

4. CALL FOR PARTICIPATION 
The practical solution and recipes, however, shall not only come 
from the LA4S consortium members. We will initiate an open call 
for contributions to find the simplest, yet most delicious LA 
recipes.  

5. REFERENCES  
[1] Dietze, S., Taibi, D. and d'Aquin, M. 2017. Facilitating 

Scientometrics in Learning Analytics and Educational Data 
Mining - the LAK Dataset. Semantic Web Journal 8, 3, 395-
403. 

[2] Gasevic, D., Dawson, S., Mirriahi, N. and Long, P. D. 2015. 
Learning Analytics – A Growing Field and Community 
Engagement. Journal of Learning Analytics 2, 1, 1-6.  

[3] Kickmeier-Rust, M. D. and Albert, D. 2016. Theory-driven 
Learning Analytics and Open Learner Modelling: The 
Teacher’s Toolbox of Tomorrow? In Proceedings of the 6th 
International Workshop on Personalization Approaches in 
Learning Environments (Halifax, Canada, July 16th, 2016) 
1618, 49-52. CEUR Workshop Proceedings. 

[4] Siemens, G., Dawson, S. and Lynch, G. 2013. Improving the 
quality and productivity of the higher education sector: 
Policy and strategy for systems level deployment of learning 
analytics. Australian Government: Office for Learning and 
Teaching. Retrieved from https://sydney.edu.au/education-
portfolio/ei/projects/SoLAR_Report_2014.pdf. 

                                                                 
1 http://lemo2.org 
2 http://dojo-ibl.appspot.com/ 


	1. INTRODUCTION
	2. LA4S APPROACH
	3. LEARNING ANALYTICS COOK BOOK
	4. CALL FOR PARTICIPATION
	5. REFERENCES


