
MORPH: Supporting the Integration of Learning Analytics 
at Institutional Level 

Zoran Jeremic, Vive Kumar and Sabine Graf 
School of Computing and Information Systems, Athabasca University, Canada 

zjeremic@athabascau.ca; vive@athabascau.ca; sabineg@athabascau.ca  
 

 
ABSTRACT 
While there is high potential in using learning analytics to provide 
educational institutions as well as teachers and learners with 
actionable information and improve learning experiences, 
currently only very few learning analytics tools are actually used 
in educational institutions. In this paper, we introduce MORPH, a 
platform that facilitates the integration of learning analytics 
modules and tools into institutional learning systems. MORPH 
provides a robust distributed architecture which combines batch, 
stream and real-time data processing using a parallel processing 
model to enable and support efficient processing of large amounts 
of data. Furthermore, it provides common management and 
administration features that enable the seamless integration of 
learning analytics research modules and tools into existing 
institutional learning systems. 

CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing?Interactive learning environments 
• Software and its engineering?Software prototyping 

Keywords 
Learning Analytics; Institutional Learning Environments; Data 
Streaming; Batch Processing; Real-time Processing; Dashboards  

1. INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, learning analytics is evolving rapidly and 
garnering broad interest of both educational institutions and 
researchers [1]. Over the last years a lot of research has been 
conducted on different topics related to learning analytics and 
several learning analytics tools and prototype systems have been 
developed. However, only a very small number of such 
tools/systems has been adopted by educational institutions. 

When designing, developing and evaluating learning analytics 
research tools and systems, the primary focus of researchers is 
often on the learning analytics research itself, including issues 
such as the proper collection of data from a learning system, the 
processing of data through different algorithms, and data 
visualization (e.g., through dashboards, alerts, notifications, etc.). 
However, general software engineering issues as well as 
management and administrative aspects for integrating such 
research modules into learning systems of whole educational 
institutions are often neglected. But such issues are crucial to 

build robust research modules that can seamlessly integrate in 
existing institutional systems of educational institutions. 
Furthermore, designing and implementing learning analytics for a 
whole educational institution typically involves complex 
computing and aggregating of large amounts of data which cannot 
be performed by traditional data management technologies [2]. 
However, many research modules are built and/or tested to run on 
limited or small-scale datasets (e.g., for one or few courses) to 
evaluate these research modules and their underlying algorithms. 
These modules often would not perform well once integrated with 
real-world educational systems which host hundreds of courses. 
Accordingly, a successful implementation of research modules in 
learning analytics requires a new application development 
paradigm to create a technical solution that effectively operates 
with large amounts of data and allows the integration of different 
research modules. 

In order to address the above-mentioned problems, we designed 
and developed MORPH, a dynamic and evolving platform, which 
facilitates the integration of innovative research tools/modules in 
the areas of learning analytics, visualization, learner profiling, 
personalization and others, into existing institutional learning 
environments. MORPH provides a robust distributed architecture 
which combines batch, stream and real-time data processing, 
using a parallel processing model. Research modules integrated 
with MORPH are structured around the provided architecture 
which ensures that data are processed in a reliable and efficient 
way. MORPH provides functionalities for seamless integration, 
management and administration of research modules in 
institutional learning management systems (LMSs). With this 
approach, a significant burden can be taken from researchers 
when aiming at developing research modules that can be used in 
real-world scenarios, so that they can focus on research-related 
issues rather than on software engineering tasks. 

2. LEARNING ANALYTICS IN MORPH 
MORPH’s architecture is built to connect research modules to 
LMSs while providing support for data processing and analytics 
of huge amounts of data as well as for management and 
administrative issues to integrate different research modules into 
LMSs used by whole educational institutions. To address the 
problem of aggregation and processing of large amounts of data, a 
distributed architecture is used, in which MORPH comprises two 
basic high level components: (1) Data Processing & Analytics 
subsystem and (2) Data Collection & Presentation subsystem, 
which are loosely coupled using RESTful services and Distributed 
Messaging System. The Data Processing & Analytics subsystem 
includes all information management components, i.e. data store 
which is separated from the LMS database, as well as components 
to search, transform, integrate and process data. The Data 
Collection & Presentation subsystem is integrated with the LMS, 
and provides different services related to the management and 
administration of research modules as well as visual components 
used by research modules such as dashboards, notifications, etc.  

 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other 
uses, contact the Owner/Author. 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029478 



Each research module is plugged into both subsystems and could 
be easily disconnected (and reconnected). In addition, MORPH 
provides management and administrative support for 
administrators and teachers. Administrators can easily turn on/off 
research modules and make them available to teachers, while 
teachers can activate/deactivate research modules in their courses, 
and tune different settings. Moreover, MORPH provides different 
APIs and reusable components such as dashboards, alerts, 
notifications, which can be reused by different research modules.  

2.1 Data Streaming and Processing  
To meet the complex requirements of learning analytics modules 
which typically process large amounts of data in different ways, 
data streaming, batch processing and real-time processing needs 
to be supported [3]. To ensure highly efficient data processing in 
MORPH, a separate data store is used for storing and searching 
data, so no data has to be retrieved from the LMS database. 
MORPH extends the LMS with a Data Collection & Presentation 
subsystem. The Data Collection subcomponent collects events, 
appends other relevant data and submits event data as a data 
stream to the Data Processing & Analytics subsystem through the 
Distributed Messaging System. The Data Processing & Analytics 
subsystem receives the event data, classifies it and forwards the 
data to its subcomponents called Stream Processors which are 
subscribed for specific event types. Stream Processors define 
operations that are applied to each individual data item as it passes 
through (e.g., calculating the average time spent on a page, 
session durations, etc.). A common scenario of use of Stream 
Processors is to provide event counters (e.g., page views per 
session, unique page views, etc.), which may then be used by 
research modules to produce more complex information.  
MOPRH offers two ways of processing (and accessing) data: 
batch processing and real-time processing. Batch processing is 
well-suited for complex calculations where access to large 
amounts of data is required and where results are not needed in 
real-time. A research module can use MORPH’s APIs to specify 
(1) when to activate batch processing (e.g., based on a specific 
input such as a user event or at specific time intervals), (2) which 
data should be processed in batch (e.g., only last user session 
events or data related to a specific user), and (3) which operations 
should be performed on the data. MORPH provides different 
types of batch job APIs for research modules and handles aspects 
such as triggering, parallelization and failover. Once a MORPH 
batch job is activated, data is collected from the data store based 
on the provided parameters, processed using the provided 
operations, and then the results are stored back to the data store. 
Real-time processing can be used in MORPH, for example, for 
providing recommendations, personalization and interventions. 
The goal is to respond in real-time or near real-time to certain user 
actions or situations identified through received events or direct 
requests. MORPH supports two approaches of real-time 
processing. The first approach is to retrieve data stored as a result 
of data streams or batch job processing, aggregate and process this 
data, run algorithms and/or analytical techniques on them, and 
visualize the respective output for the end user. Another approach 
is to extend a Learning Session Analyzer (LSA) provided by 
MORPH, through a research module. Such LSA allows analyzing 
the current and previous events of a respective learning session, as 
defined in a research module. A LSA is controlled and triggered 
by MORPH each time a user performs an action and uses a short-
term data store to store the events of a learning session for 
processing and analysis. As the result of such processing and 
analysis, certain interventions can be provided to the end users.  

2.2 Learning Interventions in MORPH 
Besides data streaming and processing, MORPH also facilitates 
the process of showing actionable information and 
recommendations in a LMS. Several options are supported by 
MORPH and in the following paragraphs, two important options 
for learning analytics modules are presented in more detail.  
MORPH provides a set of different notification types that can be 
presented to students (or teachers) for direct interventions within 
the LMS. Interruptive notifications cover a LMS page to let 
students know that something very important requires their 
immediate attention. Non-interruptive notifications appear in the 
right-bottom corner of the screen and display a personalized 
message. These notifications can have different visual appearance 
to indicate success or risks, and provide information and 
warnings. The third type of notifications are messages that are 
displayed above learning content and are typically used to provide 
information, advice or guidance. Each type of intervention can be 
either displayed on any page of the course or only on a specific 
page. For example, a message that encourages a student to take a 
more active part in forums can be displayed on any page in the 
course, while a notification that proposes additional resources to a 
learning object can be displayed on only that learning object. 
MORPH also provides advanced dashboard functionalities that 
were designed to provide rich, meaningful and timely feedback to 
students and teachers. Dashboards are tailored on the fly for each 
course and each user based on the research modules activated in 
the course and on the user’s role in the LMS. A dashboard is 
divided into logical sections which are presented on the same page 
or on different tabs, depending on the total number of widgets that 
are displayed. Widgets are containers which hold actual visual 
representations of data generated by research modules. A research 
module can define the type of diagram to be displayed and 
provide data in JSON format to populate a widget; and MORPH 
takes care of the visualization based on the provided parameters 
and data. However, if there is a need for more complex 
visualizations that are not supported by MORPH, it is possible to 
provide custom implementation for a widget.   

3. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented MORPH, a platform that facilitates the 
integration of learning analytics research modules into 
institutional learning systems. MORPH provides different support 
for such integration including management and administrative 
support as well as support for streaming and processing of large 
amounts of data. As such, it enables researchers to focus more on 
learning analytics research rather than on general software 
engineering issues, while ensuring that their research modules are 
capable of being integrated in learning systems of whole 
educational institutions. Future work deals with evaluating 
MORPH with different research modules. 

4. REFERENCES 
[1] Chatti, M. A., Lukarov, V., Thüs, H., Muslim, A., Yousef, A. 

M. F., Wahid, U., Greven, C., Chakrabarti, A., Schroeder, U. 
2014. Learning analytics: Challenges and future research 
directions. E-Learning and Education (eleed), 10.  

[2] Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Bughin, J., Dobbs, R., 
Roxburgh, C., Byers, A.H. 2011. Big Data: The Next 
Frontier for Innovation, Competition, and Productivity. 
Report. McKinsey Global Institute. 

[3] Shahrivari, S. 2014. Beyond batch processing: Towards real-
time and streaming big data. Computers 2014, 3(4), 117-129. 

 


	1. INTRODUCTION
	2. LEARNING ANALYTICS IN MORPH
	2.1 Data Streaming and Processing
	2.2 Learning Interventions in MORPH

	3. CONCLUSION
	4. REFERENCES


