
Towards Analytics for Educational Interactive e-Books

The case of the Reflective Designer Analytics Platform (RDAP)

Sokratis Karkalas
London Knowledge Lab

UCL Institute of Education
London WC1N 3QS, UK
s.karkalas@ucl.ac.uk

Manolis Mavrikis
London Knowledge Lab

UCL Institute of Education
London WC1N 3QS, UK

m.mavrikis@ucl.ac.uk

Oliver Labs
University of Potsdam

Am Neuen Palais 10, House 9
14469 Potsdam, Germany

labs@cermat.org

ABSTRACT
This paper presents an analytics dashboard that has been
developed for designers of interactive e-books. This is part
of the EU-funded MC Squared project that is developing
a platform for authoring interactive educational e-books.
The primary objective is to develop technologies and re-
sources that enhance creative thinking for both designers
(authors) and learners. The learning material is expected to
o?er learners opportunities to engage creatively with mathe-
matical problems and develop creative mathematical think-
ing. The analytics dashboard is designed to increase au-
thors’ awareness so that they can make informed decisions
on how to redesign and improve the e-books. This paper
presents architectural and design decisions on key features
of the dashboard and discusses future steps with respect to
the potential for exploratory data analysis.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.1 [Administrative Data Processing]: Education; K.3
[Computers and Education]: Miscellaneous

1. INTRODUCTION
The growing interest on learning analytics dashboards is

partly due to their potential of providing, both in real time
and retrospectively, an opportunity for awareness and decision-
making that is otherwise di?cult if not impossible. As ed-
ucational applications are being adopted and used at scale,
understanding their usage and their impact on learning is
important. We are interested in the particular genre of dig-
ital, interactive ‘books’ (or e-books) that are beginning to
be established as a possible alternative to static textbooks
o?ering several advantages both practical (such as portabil-
ity or low cost) and pedagogical (such as interactivity and
potential for formative feedback) [4, 9, 6]. We see carefully
designed dashboards as having a lot to o?er in the design
cycle of educational resources. While the emergence of au-
thoring software for e-books is making it easier to create
or modify e-books based on their preferences, there is very

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
LAK ’16, April 25 - 29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

© 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883943

little work to make this process more evidence-based. Simi-
lar to the growing interest in the possible synergies between
learning analytics, learning design and teacher inquiry [3]
we are observing a need for informing the design and re-
design of resources based on empirical data from their usage.
While with the advent of data science and analytics in gen-
eral, there are several analytical tools that are making their
appearance, most are not targeted to educational e-books.
Publishers and authors are interested in (and to some extent
only have access to) high level information such the number
of pages read, average reading times and other details that
reveal reading patterns that can correlate with sales figures.
However, from an educational point of view teachers, design-
ers require a more in-depth analysis of learners’ interaction
with the e-books. The ease of data collection o?ers unprece-
dented opportunities in enabling e-book authors to make
informed decisions as to how these books can be improved
and serve better their original design goals. The latter is one
of the goals of the EU-funded M C Squared project that is
investigating the design and use of digital, interactive, cre-
ative, mathematics e-books. A key characteristic of these
e-books is the inclusion of dynamic, interactive widgets that
target creative mathematical thinking and problem solving
rather than procedural knowledge [6]. The project engages
the members of several so-called ’Communities of Interest’
(CoI) across EU in the creation of e-books and parallel re-
quirements elicitation and analysis.

This paper presents our approach towards a dashboard
and associated visualisations particularly targeted to assist
designers to reflect on the use of their e-books. First, in
Section 2, we present related work. Section 3 describes our
overall design methodology and initial requirements after a
series of workshops, sustained online interaction and engage-
ment of key members of the CoIs. Section 4 and 5 present
our underlying architecture and the dashboard itself. Sec-
tion 6 concludes the paper.

2. RELATED WORK
There is a growing trend of learning analytics dashboards

for online, face-to-face, and blended learning settings, largely
targeted to teachers. As we cannot review them all here, we
refer the reader to relevant reviews in the field (e.g. [15]).
The closest area of work is that in collaborative or open-
ended digital learning environments that demonstrated the
potential of tools for increasing awareness, supporting reflec-
tion and facilitating decision-making and intervention [10,
5]. GLASS [7] is a web-based modular system that is based
on data that follows the CAM schema [17]. It is a versatile

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883943


solution that can be used with any CAM datasource. It fo-
cuses mainly on user activity and the detection of the most
common events. A system that is more closely related to
our project is eLAT [2]. This is a framework and an im-
plementation of a Learning Analytics Platform that is de-
signed exclusively for teachers. The aim is to o?er teachers
opportunities for exploratory data analysis and the ability
to evaluate and reflect on teaching practices and interven-
tions.

3. METHODOLOGY AND REQUIREMENTS
As mentioned in the Introduction, this work is set in the

context of the EU-funded M C Squared project that en-
gages several designers across EU in Communities of In-
terest that design mathematical e-books. For the develop-
ment of the dashboard, we are following a methodology the
largely resembles the Learning Awareness Tools User eXpe-
rience (LATUX) workflow [10]. Although that paper focuses
mostly in the design and deployment of awareness tools in
the classroom, the workflow applies in the case of targeting
designers as it consists of an iterative process of five stages
commonly found in software engineering and user experience
approaches — problem definition, low- and higher-fidelity
prototyping, pilot studies and validation in-the-wild.

Despite the fact that our focus of attention is e-book de-
signers e.g. rather that teachers, through our iterative de-
sign process it has become clear that we need to also pay
attention to the pedagogical requirements behind the de-
sign of the tools as they have potential for classroom use by
teachers. Nevertheless, in this paper, we focus on the de-
sign, prototyping and early pilot studies targeting our main
stakeholders — tech savvy designers (but not necessarily de-
velopers) and authors of e-books. in some cases these are
teachers. The starting point in this part is the identifica-
tion of usage scenarios for the e-books as specified by the
CoIs in the project. We first need to take into account that
digital resources like e-books are being used either directly
in the classroom or in ’blended’ learning scenarios (e.g. for
practice exercises at home) or in a ’flipped’ learning model
where students read and interact with the e-book content
online (e.g. at home) and complete other parts of the e-
book in the classroom with the help of other students or the
teacher. So neither context can be excluded. Based on the
above usage scenario, in early stages of our design cycle we
identified the process of analysing e-book interaction as hav-
ing similar characteristics as exploratory data analysis [14].

We also identified the following high-level requirements.
Designers should be able to:

1. utilise the service at any time and from anywhere with-
out any restrictions and dependencies on technologies
and platforms.

2. retrieve, process and analyse data about any chosen
period of an e-book’s lifetime, which can be changed
as one is working the dashboard.

3. perform di?erent types of analysis of the same data at
di?erent times throughout a session.

4. analyse an e-book at di?erent levels of granularity (book,
page, widget, user).

5. go back in time and inspect past data (flashback oper-
ations).

It is also worth clarifying that while, in principle, a dash-
board like the one we are presenting here could be used by
teachers to support their work in the classroom, our focus
here is primarily authors (who could, of course, be teach-
ers). For previous related work on dashboard for teachers
we refer the reader to related work (e.g. [11, 5]). So an addi-
tional requirement is being able to monitor the usage of an
e-book unit in real-time. Early iterations and feedback on
low-fidelity prototypes from members of the CoIs helps us
convert these requirements to a specification and eventually
to a higher-fidelity prototype that is the version we present
in this paper.

4. ARCHITECTURE
The analytics platform is designed as an external plug-

gable application that can provide its full functionality in
a totally service oriented manner through standardised in-
terfaces. It comprises two main parts: The analytics data
repository and the dashboard. These two parts are not phys-
ically or logically interdependent. The data repository com-
prises a dedicated DBMS instance and a set of RESTful web
services that can receive, validate and process xAPI mes-
sages 1. The data services are optimised to handle di?erent
types of requests and decompose incoming data in case it
is sent as a batch. That implies that the learning platform
can optionally implement its own optimisers and take ad-
vantage of these optimisations. A simple scenario would be
to perform temporary caching whenever possible and send
user actions cumulatively as a batch. This is much more ef-
ficient than sending each individual action event separately.
The following figure (fig. 1) depicts the architecture for that
part of the application:

Figure 1: Data Repository

The dashboard communicates directly with the data repos-
itory. It constantly checks to see if there is new data recorded
and discretely informs the user. It limits the number of data
requests through caching and analysis services can process
local data and construct visualisations (fig.2).

Integration with the learning platform requires nothing
more than a url to be passed along with a set of launch pa-
rameters for the dashboard. These parameters are needed
so that the dashboard can construct dynamically the struc-
ture that represents the learning environment. The assump-
tion here is that we always expect to have entities like users

1http://www.adlnet.gov/tla/experience-api



Figure 2: The Dashboard

(students), widgets (activities) and webpages (containers for
these activities). This structure has a dual purpose in the
system. It can be used to dynamically create the necessary
visualisations at the correct level and it can also be used by
the authors to navigate themselves through these visualisa-
tions during the analysis. The information passed in these
parameters is expected to match the identifiers in the user
data that will be received from the repository.

4.1 Data Management
As mentioned above this is a web-based application de-

signed to process large volumes of data in real-time and de-
liver configurable analytics to authors and teachers. This is
a service that may need to be utilised both in a synchronous
and in an asynchronous manner. In any case it is not known
in advance what will be requested by the user. That implies
that data preprocessing in the server is not a viable option.
Large datasets might have to be transferred, processed and
delivered in real-time to the client-end of the application.
When requirements like these apply, it is obvious that data
management becomes a matter of crucial importance and
therefore requires special attention. In order to have the
complete picture of what influenced the design decisions, we
must also consider the constraints. The constraints follow:

1. The service must be delivered in a distributed manner
over the web. That satisfies the first requirement but
imposes a problem of potential bandwidth limitations
that may a?ect the ability to transfer large quantities
of data in a timely fashion between tiers.

2. The service must be communicated through a web
browser without any dependencies on components that
are not inherently supported. This is a consequence of
1 that satisfies the second part of the first require-
ment but imposes an additional problem. That is the
potential memory limitations of the browser and its
subsequent inability to store large quantities of data.

3. Another problem related to 2 is the fact that JavaScript
engines in browsers follow a single-threaded model.
That means that concurrency and its respective per-
formance gains are typically not possible. Fortunately,
HTML5 o?ers the ability to distribute processing through
web workers.

4. The data processing cannot be performed in the server.
All the requirements apart from 1 (especially 7) con-
verge on that.

Considering all the above, the decision was to create a
web-based platform with a sophisticated data management
sub-component that o?ers the following:

1. It provides data caching capabilities. It maintains data
in local JavaScript databases. Data is synchronised
with the source in an asynchronous mode using Ajax.
That guarantees that this operation is a non-blocking
process in case it takes a noticeable time to complete.

2. It provides the ability for incremental updates. If more
data is needed (or less), it is not required to download
the entire dataset again but only synchronise the miss-
ing parts.

3. It is discreet enough to inform the author about the
availability of new data without interrupting what is
currently being processed.

4. It o?ers a clear distinction between synchronisation,
analysis and presentation. That helps the user operate
the system in a more e?cient way.

5. It o?ers the option to process di?erent time ranges
within the range the cached data covers. That means
that if all the required data has been downloaded, the
rest of the session can be completed in a purely dis-
connected mode.

It is obvious that the main objectives here were to keep the
amount of data to transfer and the number of round-trips
to the server to the minimum so that we can utilise in the
most e?cient way the available bandwidth. The user is able
to perform as many operations as needed on the local data
without incurring additional network tra?c and workload
to the data services. This connection-less approach makes
the application more scalable, since the data services are
able to process more requests, and more responsive, since
all the processing takes place at the client side. The au-
thors are given full control over what is synchronised and
processed. All that is needed is sensible decisions and care-
ful handling. The application provides all the information
about the amount of data that is available. It also provides
the ability to select a time range that corresponds to the
period that needs to be analysed. The authors must have
a certain degree of IT literacy so that they can understand
the limitations of the system and use it responsibly.

4.2 Distinguishing Features
RDAP is loosely coupled with the learning environment

it relates to. Communication takes place through the stan-
dardised xAPI specification that looks a lot like ActivityS-
treams 2 but allows more flexibility in the structure and the
definition of verbs. It also allows the inclusion of widget-
specific data that may follow totally di?erent data mod-
els. That provides flexibility without compromising diver-
sity. Another di?erence is in RDAP the primary focus is to
enable the author of the material to revisit the initial design
and use the feedback from the dashboard to verify the ex-
tend to which the objectives have been met. In this process
the author is expected to identify flaws in the design that
had as an e?ect the appearance of unexpected patterns in
students’ behaviour. Finally, the tree-like dynamic struc-
ture of the learning platform in RDAP provides the ability

2http://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-core/



to easily navigate in a random manner between di?erent lev-
els of specificity and thus perform exploratory data analysis
with minimal cognitive overhead.

5. THE DASHBOARD
The dashboard is initially empty. There is no data that

can be used for analysis and visualisation. The only infor-
mation that is available is the structure of the e-book and
the timestamps that define the start and the end of the time
period recorded in the analytics data repository. The avail-
able controls that can be used for parameterisation and ex-
ecution of commands are organised in areas called ribbons.
There are currently three ribbons available in the applica-
tion (Toolbar, Configuration and Event Log). The figure
below displays the configuration ribbon. This ribbon hosts
controls that can be used primarily for data-related settings
and operations. The green area in the data range part is
a special slider control that is equipped with two handles.
The entire area covered by the control corresponds to the
available data in the server. The two text fields above the
slider display the starting and ending dates of this period
and the text in the green area displays the duration. If at
the same time the e-book under investigation is being used
by students, the tool gets automatically updated with the
changes. If the author wants to analyse a smaller period
than that the handles can be used to adjust the starting
and ending dates.

Figure 3: Data Configuration

As the user adjusts the data range period, the display
range period gets automatically updated. The display range
corresponds to the data that will eventually be analysed and
display results. After the adjustments the author can press
the ’synchronize’ button to start the data synchronisation
process. After the completion of this operation the new data
is stored in the local databases and becomes available. The
next thing to do is to select which part of this data needs
to be analysed using the display range slider and press ’dis-
play’. After the analysis is completed the visualisations are
displayed in the dashboard. The tool bar ribbon can be used
for further analysis of existing data. The inspection part of
the ribbon hosts another slider that can be used for flash-
back operations. This slider is initially empty and inactive.
The first time it gets activated is when the display button
is pressed and a successful analysis completes. When that
happens it takes the time period of the currently selected
display range. As the slider moves back and forth the au-
thor can see immediate changes in the visualisations. The
changes are so fast that appear like animations to the human
eye. If step-by-step flashback is needed then the dropdown
list and the respective buttons in the inspection part must
be used.

5.1 The Visualisations
The available visualisations are categorised and presented

in three tabs: Widgets, Users and Usage. The first tab
focuses on the structure of the learning environment. On

the left we can see the structure of the unit (fig. 4). In this
case the e-book consists of three pages each one of which
contains two widgets. The nodes in the tree are selectable.
The author can use them to navigate to di?erent levels of
the e-book and display the respective visualisations.

Figure 4: Multi-level Analysis. The structure of the e-book
is shown on the left and the user can select nodes to see the
corresponding data visualisations.

The third tab focuses on widget usage but from a di?erent
perspective. It shows in the same graph how the users relate
to widgets in terms of intensity of usage. A cross-tabulation
table is used to present this information. The intersection of
a row and a column shows information about how intensely a
particular widget is used by a particular user. The intensity
of the colour in the box corresponds to the proportion of
indicators generated by that user for this particular widget
in relation to the total number of indicators for this widget.
Widgets may be given di?erent colors depending on how
heavily they are used. If the total number of indicators for a
widget is greater than the average activity per widget then
the respective column is displayed in hues of green. If it
is more than 80% of the average it is displayed in hues of
blue and if it is less than that it is displayed in hues of red.
If there are no indicators at all the column is displayed in
white color.

Figure 5: Widget Usage

These three tabs present data from di?erent perspectives.
There is often an overlap between them and two or more vi-
sualisations can complement each other and provide a view
that is more representative of what really happens in the
classroom. That implies that if there are ties between them
wherever possible, that may support a more exploratory
type of data analysis, which is desirable. An example of
that approach can be seen on the way the ’Usage’ tab is
linked to the ’Widgets’. If the author identifies something
in the former that requires further investigation, she can
click on the header of the table column (widget) and move
directly to the page that displays the set of more detailed



visualisations that correspond to this particular widget.

6. CONCLUSION
This paper presented the Reflective Designer Analytics

Platform (RDAP) that helps learning material authors re-
flect on their designs and how they meet their original ob-
jectives. A prototype was designed and tested with the MC
Squared learning platform that utilises interactive e-books
that include dynamic widgets aimed at enhancing students’
mathematical problem solving and creativity. RDAP is de-
signed to operate as a standalone, platform-independent ap-
plication that communicates with partner systems through
standardised interfaces and data formats. It features a highly
e?cient data management mechanism that enables incre-
mental synchronisation of data and disconnected operation
at the client side. This eliminates server bottlenecks, pre-
vents excessive network load, increases the analytical ca-
pacity of the tool and delivers the results through a highly
responsive user interface. From an analytical viewpoint the
strong points of the system are the ability to analyse data
from diverse and dissimilar widgets (learning activities) and
the ability to switch between di?erent levels of specificity
with ease (shallow, deep analysis). The latter is especially
advantageous in exploratory data analysis.

The system has been thoroughly tested for usability and
analytic potential. Preliminary evaluation results provided
us with positive feedback that feeds into discussions of new
features and modifications. One key part we need to pay
attention to is cognitive overload and therefore allowing the
configuration of the dashboard according to users’ prefer-
ence seems to be important. As mentioned, our focus here
has been on designers conducting retrospective data analysis
but, technically, the system can be used for real time mon-
itoring and therefore we plan to extend it with appropriate
visualisations to support teachers as well. We are, therefore,
at the time of this writing testing and improving scaleabil-
ity issues. Finally, because of the extensibility of the system
we can easily include new visualisations and plan to include
more advanced algorithms to help analysts identify impor-
tant events or patterns that are worth exploring further.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The ‘M C Squared’ project has received funding from the
European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-
2013) under grant agreement N°610467.

7. REFERENCES
[1] P. Bradford, M. Porciello, N. Balkon, and D. Backus.

The blackboard learning system: The be all and end
all in educational instruction? Journal of Educational
Technology Systems, 35(3):301–314, 2007.

[2] A. L. Dyckho?, D. Zielke, M. Bu?ltmann, M. A.
Chatti, and U. Schroeder. Design and implementation
of a learning analytics toolkit for teachers. Journal of
Educational Technology & Society, 15(3):58–76, 2012.

[3] V. Emin-Martinez, H. Cecilie, R. Triana, M. Jesus,
W. Barbara, M. Yishay;, D. Mihai, F. Rebecca, and
J.-P. Pernin. Towards teacher-led design inquiry of
learning. 2014.

[4] E. Gardiner and R. Musto. The Oxford companion to
the book, chapter The electronic book. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2010.

[5] S. Gutierrez-Santos, E. Geraniou, D. Pearce-Lazard,
and A. Poulovassilis. Design of Teacher Assistance
Tools in an Exploratory Learning Environment for
Algebraic Generalization. IEEE Transactions on
Learning Technologies, 5(4):366–376, 2012.

[6] C. Kynigos. Designing constructionist e-books: New
mediations for creative mathematical thinking?
Constructivist Foundations, 10(3):305–313, 2015.

[7] D. Leony, A. Pardo, L. de la Fuente Valent??n, D. S.
de Castro, and C. D. Kloos. Glass: a learning
analytics visualization tool. In Proceedings of the 2nd
international conference on learning analytics and
knowledge, pages 162–163. ACM, 2012.

[8] J. Lewis. Usability testing. In Handbook of Human
Factors and Ergonomics, pages 1275–1316. John
Wiley, New York, NY, 2006.

[9] R. Martin. The road ahead: ebooks, etextbooks and
publishers’ electronic resources. In M. Brown,
M. Hartnett, and T. Stewart, editors, Future
Challenges, Sustainable futures: Proceedings
ASCILITE 2012.

[10] R. Martinez-Maldonado, A. Pardo, N. Mirriahi,
K. Yacef, J. Kay, and A. Clayphan. The latux
workflow: designing and deploying awareness tools in
technology-enabled learning settings. In Proceedings of
the Fifth International Conference on Learning
Analytics And Knowledge, pages 1–10. ACM, 2015.

[11] Noss et al. The design of a system to support
exploratory learning of algebraic generalisation.
Computers & Education, 59(1):63–81, 2012.

[12] J. A. Ruipe?rez-Valiente, P. J. Mun?oz-Merino,
D. Leony, and C. D. Kloos. Alas-ka: A learning
analytics extension for better understanding the
learning process in the khan academy platform.
Computers in Human Behavior, 47:139–148, 2015.

[13] M. Sche?el, H. Drachsler, and M. Specht. Developing
an evaluation framework of quality indicators for
learning analytics. In Proceedings of the Fifth
International Conference on Learning Analytics And
Knowledge, pages 16–20. ACM, 2015.

[14] J. W. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis.
Addison-Wesley, 1977.

[15] K. Verbert, S. Govaerts, E. Duval, J. L. Santos,
F. Van Assche, G. Parra, and J. Klerkx. Learning
dashboards: an overview and future research
opportunities. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing,
18(6):1499–1514, 2014.

[16] A. Vozniuk, S. Govaerts, and D. Gillet. Towards
portable learning analytics dashboards. In Advanced
Learning Technologies (ICALT), 2013 IEEE 13th
International Conference on, pages 412–416. IEEE,
2013.

[17] M. Wolpers, J. Najjar, K. Verbert, and E. Duval.
Tracking actual usage: the attention metadata
approach. Journal of Educational Technology &
Society, 10(3):106–121, 2007.

[18] H. Zhang, K. Almeroth, A. Knight, M. Bulger, and
R. Mayer. Moodog: Tracking students’ online learning
activities. In World Conference on Educational
Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications,
volume 2007, pages 4415–4422, 2007.


	Introduction
	Related Work
	Methodology and Requirements
	Architecture
	Data Management
	Distinguishing Features

	The Dashboard
	The Visualisations

	Conclusion
	References


