
HanZi Handwriting Acquisition with Automatic Feedback 
 Chin-Hwa Kuo  

 Tamkang University  
No.151, Yingzhuan Rd., Tamsui Dist., 

New Taipei City 25137, Taiwan  
?886-2-2621-5656 

chkuo@mail.tku.edu.tw 

Jian-Wen Peng 
Chihlee Institute of Technology 

313, Sec. 1, Wunhua Rd., Banciao Dist, 
New Taipei City, 22050 Taiwan 

?886-2-2257-6167 
pchw8598@mail.chihlee.edu.tw 

Wen-Chen Chang 
Tamkang University 

No.151, Yingzhuan Rd., Tamsui Dist., 
New Taipei City 25137, Taiwan 

?886-2-2621-5656 
chyokaoru@gmail.com 

 
 

ABSTRACT 
One of the most crucial distinctions between Chinese and Western 
languages is that the former is based on ideograms, whereas the 
latter is based on phonograms. Due to this distinction, Western 
learners of Chinese often experience more difficulties in grasping 
correct character stroke sequence and / or stroke direction relative 
to native Chinese speakers. In this paper, we designed a HanZi 
writing environment with automatic feedback to address the above 
issue. Before the collection of HanZi characters on a massive 
scale, we conducted a pilot study to collect handwritten Chinese 
samples from 160 college students in the U.S. The findings from 
this study enabled us to further refine the learning environment 
and design optimal learning and teaching strategies for learners 
and teachers. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human information processing 
H 3.1 [ Content Analysis and Indexing]: Linguistic processing 

General Terms 
Design, experimentation 

Keywords 
Chinese character handwriting, personalization, learning analytics 

1. INTRODUCTION 
One of the most crucial distinctions between Chinese and Western 
languages is that the former is based on ideograms, whereas the 
latter is based on phonograms. Intermediate to advanced learners 
of an ideographic language (i.e., Chinese) are often able to deduce 
that the character ???is a type of fish, and that the character is 
pronounced as fang, even if he or she never learned this specific 
character before. He or she is also aware that the radical part ???
can only be located on the left hand side of the ideogram, and the 
phonetic part???can only be located on the right hand side. In 
other words, he or she has developed an intuition as to where 
radicals and phonetics should be located. For many learners, 
identifying and utilizing such patterns can be powerful in learning 
Chinese more effectively. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this 
work for personal  or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components 
of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the 
Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '14, Mar 24-28 2014, Indianapolis, IN, USA  
ACM978-1-4503-2664-3/14/03 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567574.2567575  

 
In learning an ideographic language, repeated character writing is 
beneficial to character recognition and memory. For many 
learners who are not Chinese native speakers, writing Chinese is 
often even more challenging than recognition. To address this 
issue, we developed a Chinese character (HanZi) writing learning 
platform with automatic feedback. This system, called Xue-Wen 
Easy Go!, intends to take advantage of the current advances in 
mobile devices and learning analytics to collect learner’s 
handwritten Chinese characters. This collection would inform the 
design of learning and teaching strategies to improve learning 
effectiveness. 

2. OVERVIEW OF THE HANZI 
LEARNING PLATFORM 
In the digital era, learners are able to learn a language anytime and 
anywhere. To effectively learn Chinese, computer assisted 
learning systems with interactive and real time automatic 
feedback features can be especially beneficial. The following 
Chinese learning platform, Xue-Wen Easy Go!, takes two issues 
into consideration, namely (1) a multimedia learning environment, 
and (2) an automatic feedback mechanism with data collection. 
The system records the learner’s inputs (i.e., handwritten Chinese 
characters) for further analysis, effectively eliminating the need 
for a camera recording process which requires more manpower 
and time.  The system consists of three main mechanisms: (1) 
data collection, which includes learner login, handwriting display, 
handwriting practice, and automatic feedback; (2) data filtering 
and analysis; and (3) the design of learning and teaching strategies 
based on the results of (2). 

3. HANZI HANDWRITING ACQUISITION 
The designed Xue-Wen Easy Go! client runs on MS Windows XP 
and Windows 7 operating systems.  It consists of 5,000 popular 
Chinese characters, both in traditional and simplified forms.    

3.1 Characters and Strokes Display 
The system supports the four most common types of Chinese 
query inputs: pinyin, bo-po-mo (???), radical, and stroke count. 
Characters that have the same radical or homophone appear in the 
auxiliary area so that learners can choose the character they would 
like practice. The display function supports stroke display in 
sequence mode and radical display mode as shown in Figure 1. 
Pause and replay functions are included in the system. The 
combination of these functions enables learners to effectively 
build on their knowledge of character radicals.  
(https://youtu.be/La-scFai6qE) 

261



 

3.2 Chinese Handwriting Practice and 
Automatic Feedback 
In learning an ideographic language, repeated character writing is 
beneficial to character recognition and memory. As a result, 
Xue-Wen Easy Go! is designed with a handwriting practice area, 
as shown in Figure 2. After the system is installed, learners 
practice writing characters using an electronic pen on a tablet, just 
as they would traditionally practice using a ballpoint pen on paper. 
Our system supports three modes of handwriting practice: (1) 
basic mode, which guides the learner stroke-by-stroke through the 
character; (2) intermediate mode, which guides the learner 
radical-by-radical through the character; and (3) advanced mode, 
which does not present any guides. Hence, both teachers and 
learners have the flexibility to select the most appropriate mode at 
any point in the learning / teaching process.  

The automatic feedback is a special design which consists of the 
following features: 

(1) Error feedback: Common errors that can be automatically 
detected include errors in stroke sequence, stroke direction, 
stroke junction, missing strokes, and extra strokes; automatic 
feedback is available to learners 

(2) Character neatness evaluation and feedback:  The “neatness” 
of a handwritten character, computed using the distance 
between the character centroid and the radical centroids, can 
be evaluated; automatic feedback is available to learners 

(3) Overall evaluation:  The overall score is broken down into 5 
levels (1~5). The final score takes stroke correctness and 
character neatness into consideration 

(4) Time tags: Records the total time of the handwriting process 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. The EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 
Before the collection of HanZi characters on a massive scale, we 
conducted a pilot study to refine the designed system. Participants 
included 160 U.S. college students in their first year as Chinese 
learners. The students were assigned HanZi handwriting and 
recognition homework. The handwritten samples (i.e., characters) 
were collected once a week. Traditionally, it would have been 
difficult and time-consuming to analyze each character 
one-by-one, but by using Xue-Wen Easy Go!, we were able to 
collect handwritten characters quickly, and with dynamic 
playback of each individual character, as shown in Figure 3.Each 
handwritten sample is accompanied with data including time tags, 
character scores, error patterns, and learner IDs (Figure 4). Using 
this information, we can effectively analyze error patterns and 
design improved learning and teaching strategies for each learner, 
as well as teachers. Learners are also able to proactively retrieve 
their handwritten characters from the system to review and make 
corrections. A detailed view of the above processes is shown in 
the following video clip, http://youtu.be/MlJbF2T1rkA. 

 

Figure 3  Dynamic playback for the character???  

 

5. CONCLUSIONS 
A Chinese handwriting environment called Xue-Wen Easy Go! 
was designed and described in this paper. The system includes 
several technologically enhanced features which allow us to 
automatically acquire handwritten samples and provide interactive 
feedback for learners. We also performed a pilot study which 
enabled us to improve the developed HanZi handwriting tools. At 
present, we are in the position to design a web-based HanZi 
learning environment to collect handwriting samples on a more 
massive scale for further learning analysis. 

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank National Science Council, Taiwan, for 
partly supporting the present research under NSC 101-2511-S-032 
-003 and NSC 101MG08-1 

7.REFERENCES 
[1] Chin-Hwa Kuo, Yi-Wen Huang, Wen-Bing Horng, 

Chun-Wen Chen ,Chen-Hsiang Chen.2009.Design of a 
Chinese Character Learning System. In TWELF 2009(Tainan, 
Taiwan Sep.2009) 

[2] Jin, H. G. 2003. Empirical evidence on character recognition 
in multimedia Chinese tasks. Concentric: Studies in English 
Literature and Linguistics, 29(2), 36–58. 

[3] S. L. Yeh, J. L. Li, T. Takeuchi, V. C. Sun, and W. R. Liu, 
2003 “The role of learning experience on the perceptual 
organization of Chinese characters”, Visual Cognition, vol. 
10, pp. 729-764

 

Figure 1 ?Xue-Wen Easy Go!?Query user interface 

 

Figure 4 Error patterns are recorded and further analyzed 

Figure 2 Interface of handwriting and automatic feedback 

262





