
2nd Cross-LAK: Learning Analytics Across                
Physical and Digital Spaces 

Roberto Martinez-Maldonado1, Davinia Hernandez-Leo2, Abelardo Pardo3 and Hiroaki Ogata4 
1University of Technology Sydney, NSW Australia; 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain;  

3The University of Sydney, NSW Australia; 4Kyushu University, Japan 
Roberto.Martinez-Maldonado@uts.edu.au, Davinia.Hernandez@upf.edu, Abelardo.Pardo@sydney.edu.au, Hiroaki.Ogata@gmail.com  

 
ABSTRACT 
Student’s learning happens where the learner is, rather than 
being constrained to a single physical or digital environment.	It 
is of high relevance for the LAK community to provide analytics 
support in blended learning scenarios where students can 
interact at diverse learning spaces and with a variety of 
educational tools. This workshop aims to gather the sub-
community of LAK researchers, learning scientists and 
researchers in other areas, interested in the intersection between 
ubiquitous, mobile and/or classroom learning analytics. The 
underlying concern is how to integrate and coordinate learning 
analytics seeking to understand the particular pedagogical needs 
and context constraints to provide learning analytics support 
across digital and physical spaces. The goals of the workshop 
are to consolidate the Cross-LAK sub-community and provide a 
forum for idea generation that can build up further 
collaborations. The workshop will also serve to disseminate 
current work in the area by both producing proceedings of 
research papers and working towards a journal special issue. 

CCS Concepts 
•  Information systems ?? Information systems applications ?? 
Collaborative and social computing systems and tools  

Keywords 
Learning analytics, seamless learning, integration, monitoring 

1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 
Student’s learning happens where the learner is [4] rather than 
being constrained to a single physical or digital environment [7, 
14]. Learning often occurs in spaces and at moments that go 
beyond formal education. Increasing access to emerging 
communication technologies and the proliferation of mobile and 
pervasive devices have made it possible for students to make use 
of a wide range of educational (and non-educational) tools [9]. 
At the same time, educational providers, including schools and 
universities, are continuously deploying a variety of educational 
technologies and pedagogical resources in both online and face-
to-face settings [13]. Educational research has revealed the 
pedagogical benefits of letting students experience different 
types of content, "real world" challenges, and physical and 
social interactions with educators or other learners [2, 10]. 
Moreover, students commonly work outside the boundaries of 
the institutional learning system(s). They may interact face-to-
face, use other educational tools or even use tools that were not 

specifically designed to serve in learning contexts. Teachers may 
want students to use not only the tools offered by the institution, 
but also other tools that are more suitable to the context and 
subject matter [12].  

Pervasive and mobile technologies can be used to allow learners 
to get remote access to educational resources from different 
physical spaces (e.g. ubiquitous/mobile learning support [15, 
17]) or to enrich their learning experiences in the classroom in 
ways that were not previously possible (e.g. face-to-face [3, 5, 
10]/blended learning support [16]). In parallel, these 
technologies are becoming or getting embedded into everyday 
objects that can communicate information and generate large 
amounts of interaction data. This is creating new possibilities for 
learning analytics to provide continued support or a more 
holistic view about learning, moving beyond desktop-based 
learning resources [1, 6]. Providing continued support in the 
classroom, for mobile experiences and using web-based systems 
has been explored to different extents and each poses its own 
challenges [11, 12]. An overarching concern is how to integrate 
analytics across these different spaces and tools in a coordinated 
way. In short, there is an increasing interest in providing support 
for students’ learning across physical and digital spaces, and the 
means to achieve this are more readily available. 	

2. WORKSHOP THEMES 
We will invite contributions to the Workshop on Learning 
Analytics Across Physical and Digital Spaces Research. 
Contributions should relate to the design and study of learning 
analytics innovations and solutions, including but not limited to 
any of the following themes:  
1. Support Across Multiple Digital Spaces: Studies of novel 
combinations of analytics and instructional approaches and 
systems that span across multiple digital learning tools 
(including mining, modelling or visualising datasets that 
integrate logs from multiple learning tools); 

2. Bridging the Physical and Digital Realms: Design and 
study of learning situations that include collocated settings 
and/or the use of online (remote access) tools  (e.g. including 
‘everyday’ settings, collocated collaboration situations, multi-
device ecologies or blended learning cases); 

3. Data Integration of Heterogeneous Learning Data Sources: 
Discussion of methodologies and theoretical approaches, and 
their technical solutions, to integrate learning activity logs from 
multiple sources of learner’s data (including technical but also 
non-technical issues such as ethics, orchestration or data 
management) with learning designs and strategies. 

3. EVIDENCE OF INTEREST & PC 
We expect to conduct a full day workshop with at least 20 
participants from the sub-community of LAK researchers 
interested in ubiquitous, mobile and/or face-to-face learning 
analytics, and learning scientists and researchers from other 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other 
uses, contact the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029432 



communities who have explored the perspective of learning 
across digital and physical spaces. We will encourage 
submission of original papers that demonstrate ways to integrate 
and coordinate learning analytics to provide continued support 
to learning across digital and/or physical spaces.	A list of people 
who will be invited to serve on the program committee for the 
workshop can be found here.  

Similar workshops organized by Davinia Hernandez-Leo 
in 2011, Roberto Martinez-Maldonado in 2012 and the first 
edition of Cross-LAK in LAK 2016 are indicative of sustained 
interest of the research community in this sub-field. The first 
Cross-LAK workshop was very successful in terms of papers 
submitted and participants.  

These workshops are the following:  

1) International Workshop on Learning Analytics Across 
Physical and Digital Spaces (Cross-LAK’ 16 held in 
conjunction with LAK 2016). Website. 

2) International Workshop on Digital Ecosystems for 
Collaborative Learning (DECL 2012 held in conjunction with 
ICLS 2012. Website; and  

3) International Workshop on Learning Activities Across 
Physical and Virtual Spaces (AcrossSpaces 2011 held in 
conjunction with EC-TEL 2011). Website.  

4. EXPECTED OUTCOMES 
The expected outcomes of the workshop are the following:   

Consolidating the Cross-LAK Community. This workshop will 
build on the design space and guidelines formulated in the first 
edition of Cross-LAK [8] in order to consolidate the synergy 
between researchers and propose further steps as a community.  

Provide a forum to ignite collaboration. The workshop will 
bring together the sub-communities within the learning sciences, 
educational technology, and LAK with the goal of contributing 
with their expertise in identifying the major issues to be tackled 
in the area, generating new ideas for future research and 
sparking on each other in ways that can lead to future 
collaboration within the LAK community.  
Work towards a special issue on Cross-LAK themes. 
Proceedings of research papers which will be produced and 
selected papers will be invited to be submitted in full to a special 
issue (SI) on Cross-LAK in an indexed journal. 

5. CONCLUSION 
While this workshop can be considered to be grounded on a 
consolidated line interest on the topic of learning across spaces, 
in this case the focus is on the particular challenges to provide 
continued support to students by using learning analytics 
techniques.  

6. REFERENCES  
[1]. Aljohani, N. R. and Davis, H. C. 2012. Learning analytics in 

mobile and ubiquitous learning environments. In Proc. of World 
Conference on Mobile and Contextual Learning: mLearn 2012 
(Helsinki, Finland, Oct 16-18). 70-77. 

 
[2]. Delgado Kloos, C., Hernández-Leo, D., and Asensio-Pérez, J.I. 

2012. Technology for Learning across Physical and Virtual 
Spaces. Journal of Universal Computer Science, 18, 15, 2093-
2096. 

[3]. Di Mitri, D., Scheffel, M., Drachsler, H., Börner, D., & Ternier, 
S. 2016. Learning Pulse: Using Wearable Biosensors and 

Learning Analytics to Investigate and Predict Learning Success in 
Self-regulated Learning. In Proc. of Workshop Cross-LAK – held 
at LAK ‘16, (Edinburgh, UK, Apr 25). 34-39. 

[4]. Dourish, P. 2004. What we talk about when we talk about 
context. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 8, 1, 19-30. 

[5]. Domínguez, F., & Chiluiza, K. 2016. Towards a distributed 
framework to analyze multimodal data. In Proc. of Workshop 
Cross-LAK – held at LAK ‘16, (Edinburgh, UK, Apr 25). 52-57. 

[6]. Kitto, K., Cross, S., Waters, W., and Lupton, M. 2015. Learning 
analytics beyond the LMS: the connected learning analytics 
toolkit. In Proc. LAK’15 (NY, USA, March 16-20). NY: ACM, 
11-15 

[7]. Looi, C. K., Wong, L. H., & Milrad, M. 2015. Special Issue on 
Seamless, Ubiquitous, and Contextual Learning. IEEE 
Transactions on Learning Technologies, 1, 2-4. 

[8]. Martinez-Maldonado, R., and Hernandez-Leo, D. 2016. Cross-
LAK: Learning Analytics Across Physical and Digital Spaces 
2016. CEUR Proceedings, 1601.  

[9]. Muñoz-Cristóbal, J. A., Prieto, L. P., Asensio-Pérez, J. I., 
Martínez-Monés, A., Jorrín-Abellán, I. M., and Dimitriadis, Y. 
2014.	 Deploying learning designs across physical and web 
spaces: Making pervasive learning affordable for teachers. 
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 14, 31-46. 

[10]. Muñoz-Cristóbal, J. A., Rodríguez-Triana, M. J., Gallego-
Lema, V., Arribas-Cubero, H. F., Martínez-Monés, A., & 
Asensio-Pérez, J. I. 2016. Toward the integration of 
monitoring in the orchestration of across-spaces learning 
situations. In Proc. of Workshop Cross-LAK – held at LAK 
‘16, (Edinburgh, UK, Apr 25). 15-21. 

[11]. Pérez-Sanagustín, M.; Ramírez-González, G.; Hernández-
Leo, D.; Muñoz-Organiero, M.; Santos, P.; Blat, J.; Delgado-
Kloos, C. Discovering the campus together: a mobile and 
computer-based learning experience, Journal of Network and 
Computer Applications, 35, 1, 2012, 176-188. 

[12]. Prieto, L. P., Muñoz-Cristóbal, J. A., Asensio-Pérez, J. I., & 
Dimitriadis, Y. 2012. Making Learning Designs Happen in 
Distributed Learning Environments with GLUE!-PS. In A. 
Ravenscroft, S. Lindstaedt, C. Kloos & D. Hernández-Leo, Eds., 
21st Century Learning for 21st Century Skills, 7563. 
Saarbrücken, Germany: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 489-494. 

[13]. Rogers, Y. 2008. Using External Visualizations to Extend and 
Integrate Learning in Mobile and Classroom Settings. In J. K. 
Gilbert, M. Reiner & M. Nakhleh, Eds., Visualization: Theory 
and Practice in Science Education. Springer Netherlands: 
Dordrecht, 89-102. 

[14]. Sharples, M., and Roschelle, J. 2010. Special section on 
mobile and ubiquitous technologies for learning. IEEE 
Transactions on Learning Technologies, 1, 4-6. 

[15]. Shimada, A., Okubo, F., Yin, C., & Ogata, H. 2016. 
Automatic Generation of Personalized Review Materials 
Based on Across-Learning-System Analysis. In Proc. of 
Workshop Cross-LAK – held at LAK ‘16, (Edinburgh, UK, 
Apr 25). 22-27. 

[16]. Wang, M., Shen, R., Novak, D., & Pan., X. 2009. The impact 
of mobile learning on students’ learning behaviours and 
performance: Report from a large blended classroom. BJET, 40, 
4, 673-695. 

[17]. Weyers, B., Nowke, C., Kuhlen, T., Kousuke, M., & Ogata, H. 
2016. Web-based Interactive and Visual Data Analysis for 
Ubiquitous Learning Analytics. In Proc. of Workshop Cross-LAK 
– held at LAK ‘16, (Edinburgh, UK, Apr 25). 65-69. 



