
Analyzing Students’ Intentionality towards Badges within 
a Case Study using Khan Academy

José A. Ruipérez-Valientea,b, Pedro J. Muñoz-Merinoa, Carlos Delgado Kloosa 
a Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Avenida Universidad 30, 28911 Leganés (Madrid) Spain 

b IMDEA Networks Institute, Av. del Mar Mediterráneo 22, 28918 Leganés (Madrid) Spain 
{jruipere, pedmume, cdk}@it.uc3m.es 

ABSTRACT 
One of the most common gamification techniques in education is 
the use of badges as a reward for making specific student actions. 
We propose two indicators to gain insight about students’ 
intentionality towards earning badges and use them with data 
from 291 students interacting with Khan Academy courses. The 
intentionality to earn badges was greater for repetitive badges, and 
this can be related to the fact that these are easier to achieve. We 
provide the general distribution of students depending on these 
badge indicators, obtaining different profiles of students which 
can be used for adaptation purposes.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
J.1 [Computer Applications]: Administrative Data Processing – 
Education. K.3.2 [Computing Milieux]: Computers and 
Education – Computer and Information Science Education: 
Information systems education  

General Terms 
Algorithms, Measurement, Human Factors 

Keywords 
Badges, Learning Analytics, Khan Academy, Modelling Behavior 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Gamification techniques in education have been used broadly in 
the last years. The application of learning analytics for gamified 
environments in education can bring useful information for the 
learning process such as students’ behavior through gamification 
(e.g. if they are motivated or not for gamification features). One of 
the most used gamification techniques in education is the 
provision of badges. Badges are awards that students can receive 
by doing specific actions on an educational platform (e.g. for 
watching videos during some time or for solving a set of exercises 
correctly). Gamification indicators are not frequently included in 
those platforms, e.g. the review of indicators reported by 
Dyckhoff et al. [1], does not include any.  ALAS-KA [2], a plugin 
for the Khan Academy platform that provides a set of more than 
21 new different indicators related to the learning process, include 
some general indicators related to badges but they do not describe 
the intention of students to get them.  
In this work, we propose and implement indicators for analyzing 
students’ intention for the achievement of badges, taking into 

account two different types of badges: topic and repetitive ones. 
There are other works [3, 4] which have also proposed models of 
the students’ behavior towards badges in Stack Overflow and 
findings seem to indicate that indeed badges affect the normal 
behavior of students. The work of Grant & Betts [3], focuses in 
three types of specific badges of Stack Overflow to see how these 
badges influence the behavior of students – which is a similar 
approach to ours as it is very challenging to focus in all types of 
badges. They found that user activity increased before earning 
some badges and it would decrease immediately afterwards. 
However to the best of our knowledge no work has proposed 
similar models about the intentionality of students towards a 
badge system as we do in this proposal. 

2. MODELLING STUDENTS’ 
INTENTIONALITY TOWARDS BADGES 
IN KHAN ACADEMY 
Students can receive badges as an award for their interaction with 
the platform. Students can also access detailed information about 
each badge and the requisites to get it and the student will receive 
a notification whenever they earn a badge. Our aim is to infer if a 
student is intentionally completing the badge conditions in order 
to acquire badges. Taking into account the diverse types of 
badges, there are some cases in which we cannot infer this 
information based on the events that the learning platform 
provide. We focus on two types of badge: topic badges and 
repetitive badges.  

2.1 Intentionality on Topic Badges (ITB) 
Topic badges have a set of exercises as requirement. The student 
must reach a proficient level in all of the required exercises to get 
the badge. In addition, in our experiment, the exercises required 
are not repeated in the requisites of the different topic badges. A 
specific topic badge can only be received once.  
We calculate the number of badges the student has received, and 
compare it with the maximum number of badges the student might 
have received, taking into account the total number of proficient 
exercises the user has mastered. Therefore, we would be able to 
see if the student is trying to maximize the number of badges 
he/she is earning according to his/her actions.  
The system first needs to retrieve the number of topic badges that 
the student has received. Next, we have designed an algorithm 
which obtains the maximum number of badges that the student 
could have received with the number of exercises that he/she has 
mastered. The last step is to divide the number of badges that the 
student has received with the maximum number of badges that the 
student could have received with those skills, which gives the ITB 
indicator.  

2.2 Intentionality on Repetitive Badges (IRB) 
This indicator is related to those badges that can be earned 
repetitively. Our goal is to be able to detect if the specific badge 
was earned as part of the natural learning process or not. Then, we 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact 
the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883947 



would be able to detect if the student is intentionally earning more 
and more of the same type.  
Students should solve exercises until the system informs them that 
they have achieved a proficient level in that skill. Therefore, when 
a student keeps solving exercises after achieving proficiency in 
the skill and they earn a repetitive badge, we make the hypothesis 
that they keep solving exercises not to learn (they have already 
mastered the concept) but to earn more badges. At the end of the 
process we can calculate the percentage of repetitive badges that 
were intentionally earned (i.e. the level of repeated badges earned 
without being part of the learning process out of the total number 
of badges), which gives the IRB indicator.  

3. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
In this section we apply the two metrics from previous section in 
an experiment with 291 students using the Khan Academy 
platform at Universidad Carlos III de Madrid. These courses are 
taken by freshmen students in the topics of physics, chemistry and 
mathematics. 
For this analysis we have set a threshold of at least 60 minutes in 
order to guarantee that the students made some interaction with 
the platform, discarding students who did not do enough activity. 
Figure 1 shows the density distribution of both intentionality 
indicators for all students. The 1st quartile of ITB and IRB 
indicators is 0, as well as the median of ITB. This means that 
there are a big percentage of people who despite spending at least 
60 minutes, did not show much interest on earning badges, 
especially topic badges. On the other hand the median for IRB is 
48.44%, which seems to indicate that students show more interest 
in repetitive badges. The mean value of IRB indicates that the 
average user earns 39.52% of repetitive badges intentionally, 
which we think is a high percentage. We must state too, that 
probably many of the students near the 0% of both indicators, 
probably did not interacted a lot with the platform, as a result, 
they might be end up classified as having no interest for badges.  
A visual look at figure 1 can help understand how these two 
indicators are distributed among the students. We can see that for 
ITB, a higher amount of the population is accumulated in the low 
numbers of ITB, and there are not many users getting between 50-
100% of ITB, however we can see a small peak at 100%, who are 
the set of students showing a lot of interest. In the case of IRB, we 
can see that there is a valley between 10-30% who are probably 
those students who interacted with the platform, but did not show 
interest for repetitive badges. Also we can see a moderate peak 
between 50-75% whom are students showing a moderate interest 
in repetitive badges and 75-100% whom are those showing a high 
interest. We should note out that to be able to acquire in IRB such 
high values, you must really put a lot of interest in these badges. 
Overall, it looks like students felt more motivated towards 
repetitive badges rather than topic badges, but we should also 
mention that as these badges are easier to earn, and that might be 
why students might feel more motivated towards them. We also 
found a moderate correlation (r = 0.445, p < 0.00) between IRB 
and ITB, which makes sense, because if one student is interested 
in earning one type of badge, probably the other type too. 
Knowing which students are really motivated and challenged to 
earn more badges, might help in order to be able to adapt their 
learning process within virtual learning environments, and these 
indicators can be combined with others for making adaptation e.g. 
using approaches like [5]. Although these indicators have been 

defined for the Khan Academy platform, they can be easily 
generalized to other platforms. In order to implement these badge 
indicators in a different context, the intentionality for obtaining 
topic badges should consider a set of badges for which each badge 
can be achieved by obtaining the proficiency in a set of predefined 
exercises. Each badge cannot repeat an exercise as requisite if it is 
part of another badge’s requisites. The intentionality for achieving 
repetitive badges should consider badges that can be obtained 
several times for students. 

 
Figure 1: Density distribution of the intentionality indicators. 

4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work has been supported by the “eMadrid” project (Regional 
Government of Madrid) under grant S2013/ICE-2715, the 
“RESET” project (Ministry of Economy and Competiveness) 
under grant RESET TIN2014-53199-C3-1-R and the European 
Erasmus+ SHEILA project under grant 562080-EPP-1-2015-BE-
EPPKA3-PI-FORWARD 

5. REFERENCES 
[1] Dyckhoff, A.L., Lukarov, V., Muslim, A., Chatti, M.A. and 

Schroeder, U. 2013. Supporting action research with learning 
analytics. Proceedings of the Third International Conference 
on Learning Analytics and Knowledge - LAK ’13 (New York, 
New York, USA, 2013), 220. 

[2] Ruipérez-Valiente, J.A., Muñoz-Merino, P.J., Leony, D. and 
Delgado Kloos, C. 2015. ALAS-KA: A learning analytics 
extension for better understanding the learning process in the 
Khan Academy platform. Computers in Human Behavior. 47 
(2015), 139–148 

[3] Grant, S. and Betts, B. 2013. Encouraging User Behaviour 
with Achievements?: An Empirical Study. 10th Working 
Conference on Mining Software Repositories (2013), 65–68. 

[4] Anderson, A., Huttenlocher, D. and Kleinberg, J. 2013. 
Steering User Behavior with Badges. 22nd international 
conference on World Wide Web (2013), 95–106. 

[5] Muñoz-Merino, P. J., Kloos, C. D., Muñoz-Organero, M., & 
Pardo, A. 2015. A software engineering model for the 
development of adaptation rules and its application in a 
hinting adaptive e-learning system. Computer Science and 
Information Systems, 12(1), 203-231

 



