
Success, activity and drop-outs in MOOCs
An exploratory study on the UNED COMA courses

Jose Luis Santos, Joris Klerkx,
Erik Duval

Computer Science department, KU Leuven
Celestijnenlaan 200 A

Leuven, Belgium
{joseluis.santos, joris.klerkx, erik.duval}

at cs.kuleuven.be

David Gago, Luis Rodríguez
Centro Superior para la Enseñanza Virtual

(CSEV)
Avda. de Esparta s/n. Edificio UNED

Las Rozas de Madrid, Spain
{dgago, lrodriguez}@csev.org

ABSTRACT
This paper presents an exploratory study about two lan-
guage learning MOOCs deployed in the UNED COMA plat-
form. The study identifies three research questions: a) How
does activity evolve in these MOOCs? b) Are all learn-
ing activities relevant?, and c) Does the use of the target
language influence?. We conclude that the MOOC activ-
ity drops not only due to the drop-outs. When students
skips around 10% of the proposed activities, the percentage
of passing the course decrease in a 25%. Forum activity is
a useful indicator for success, however the participation in
active threads is not. Finally, the use of the target language
course is not an indicator to predict success.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.2 [Computers and Education]: Computer Science
Education; J.1 [Administrative Data Processing]: Ed-
ucation

General Terms
Management, Measurement, Performance, Design, Experi-
mentation, Human Factors.

Keywords
Learning analytics, participation, MOOCs, Visualisation

1. INTRODUCTION
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) give us the op-

portunity to collect unprecedented volumes of data on stu-
dent interaction with learning systems as well as to study
how the use of social media impacts on the learner [4]. How-
ever, student participation in MOOCs is varied. The par-
ticipation has been categorised in: people who do not even
start the course, students who did not finish the course or

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
LAK’14 March 24 - 28 2014, Indianapolis, IN, USA
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2664-3/14/03 $15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567574.2567627 ...$15.00.

drop-outs, students who are not interested in passing the
course but check periodically the learning resources and, fi-
nally, students who pass the course [6, 7].

Drop-outs are one of the main concerns in MOOC studies
[1].

This paper selected three of the research questions where
the analysis of MOOC log data in the UNED platform pro-
vided useful insights. Other research questions were dis-
carded because was necessary to track more user interac-
tions.

The remainder of this text is structured as follows: next
section presents how the courses are structured in order to
provide a better understanding of the dataset. Then, we
present the results of the analysis. The paper ends with a
summary of the conclusions and future work.

2. UNED COMA
UNED COMA is the OpenMooc [2] platform of the Span-

ish National Distance Education University (UNED). Par-
ticipants in UNED COMA have access to learning materi-
als in the form of short videos recorded by teachers, self-
assessment activities to check progress, and a forum where
they can ask questions. ‘Badges’ are automatically awarded
to participants, recognising their progress and contributions
to the learning community.

In addition to ‘badges’, two different types of accreditation
are available, namely: a) credential: validation of having
successfully finished the course and having passed an online
test and b) UNED COMA certificate: in collaboration with
UNED (after formal f2f test in a UNED centre).

The second week of October 2013, there were more than
141,000 unique registrations in the 21 courses available in the
platform. So far, more than 5,000 UNED COMA certificates
have been awarded.

In order to analyse the data in some detail, we focus on
two of the language courses: ‘Fundamentals of German for
Spanish speakers’ and ‘Professional English’. The German
and English language courses had 23065 and 33811 students,
respectively. The German language course is for beginners
and relied on peer review and questionnaires, and the En-
glish language course is for advanced students with student
progress assessed through questionnaires only. Around 5%
of the students are likely to pass the language courses. These
percentages are similar to other non language courses in the
same platform.

98



3. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Drop-out rates and social interactions are two elements

often discussed in MOOC research [1, 3]. Below, we report
on our analysis of these two aspects with the UNED COMA
platform. In this section, we discuss three research ques-
tions. Every research question contains hypotheses that we
have explored through the use of visualisations.

Section 3.1 focuses on low completion ratios of MOOCs[1,
3], from two different points of view. We compare students
who only access activities with students that also take as-
sessments. We also compare the discussion forum activity
of students who passed the course with the total students.

Section 3.1 results drive our research towards the explo-
ration of how this activity is linked to the learning results.
We know from previous studies that the lack use of fora has
a relation with failure [9, 10], therefore Section 3.2 explores
how activity within the platform may relate with those stu-
dents who passed the course. Moreover, we also know that
the use of the target language in language courses [8] can be
relevant. Section 3.3 explores how the use of the language
in the fora related to the students.

3.1 RQ1: how does activity evolve?
MOOC studies point out that the activity in forums drops

considerably as the course progresses [1]. We know from
previous experiments [11] that there also is a drop in activity
after the first week in blended learning courses.

In order to analyse this research question, we have created
two visualisations per course (see Figure 1) and defined three
hypotheses. The first chart visualises student access to the
activities of each unit (blue bar chart) and student access to
the assessments (red line chart). The second chart visualises
the fora activity per day: in that diagram, the blue line
represents the total student activity per day and the red
line represents the activity in the fora considering only those
students who eventually passed the course.

Hypothesis 1: Drops-outs occur at the beginning of the
course.

Figure 1 shows that both courses share a characteristic:
75% of the students drop-out in the first three units of the
course, so before the students reach the half of the course.
Roughly, each unit loses 25% of students until unit 4, when
the number of students becomes more or less stable.

Moreover, Figure 1 shows that the first activity of each
unit is more visited than the rest of the activities of the
same unit and more than the last activities of the previous
units. Access to the activities decreases, but the first activity
of each unit breaks this pattern. This can be due to many
students accessing only the first activity of each unit, in
order to explore course content.

Maybe, here lies a hidden opportunity to reduce the num-
ber of drop-outs: MOOCs should pay attention to these first
activities in each unit, in order to motivate and engage stu-
dents.

Hypothesis 2: The drop activity in the fora is not due only
to drop-outs.

As we reported at the beginning of this section, some stud-
ies point out that the reduction of fora activity on fora or
social media is due to drop-outs leaving the course [1]. Fig-
ure 1 shows that for those students who passed the course
(red line), the activity also decreases, following a pattern
similar the blue line which includes the drop-outs. This ac-
tivity drop is not so unusual, we already reported it in a case

study of a blended learning course [11].
Hypothesis 3: The percentage of students who pass the

course when they follow the course till the end is significantly
higher.

Around 25% (3763 students) and 9% (2489 students) started
the second activity of the last unit of the German and En-
glish course (we exclude the first activity of the unit, because
it breaks the patterns as reported before). So we may as-
sume that these people remain in the course till the end.
Considering only these students, the percentage of students
who pass the course is up to 40% and 41%. Whilst these
percentages are more acceptable than the initial ratios of 3%
and 6%.

3.2 RQ2: Are all learning activities relevant?
Section 3.1 reports that among those students who re-

main active in the course untill the end, the success rate is
around 40%. In this section, we analyse the data in order
to find relevant metrics or common characteristics among
those students who passed the course. For example, a study
reported that higher social network activity does not im-
ply better performance, however usually lower activity does
imply worse performance [9].

Our hypotheses are:
Hypothesis 1: There is a threshold on activities done.

Above this threshold, students are not more likely to pass
the course.

In order to explore this hypothesis, we have visualised the
percentage of students who passed the course based on the
number of the learning activities that they did (see Figure
2).The first bin in the x-axis includes those students who
did less than the total number of activities minus 50. The
total number of activities are 130 activities for the English
course and 110 activities for the German course. We chose
total minus 50 activities as a low threshold because nobody
in that bin passed any of the courses. The y-axis in Figure 2
represents the percentages of students who pass the course
per bin represented in the x-axis. Consecutive bins increase
by 10 activities, until the maximum number of activities in
the course.

Figure 2 shows that students who did more course activ-
ities had higher chances to pass the course. Therefore, we
do not find the threshold hypothesised in hypothesis 1. The
more learning activities a student does, the more likely the
student will complete the course successfully. This evidence
is also supported by statistical analysis when we perform the
Spearman’s rank correlation test to the individual activity
per student. The test result is a significant positive correla-
tion with p-value<0.001 and ?=0.32. Indeed, skipping only
10 of the course activities decreases the percentage drasti-
cally decreased by 25 points. Therefore, doing all learning
activities was a key factor to pass the course.

Hypothesis 2: There is a threshold on forum participation.
Above this threshold, students are not more likely to pass
the course.

In order to validate hypothesis 2, we have visualised the
percentage of students who passed the course based on their
fora activity (see Figure 3). We grouped the students in
bins for students who have between 0 and 10 posts, between
10 and 20 posts, between 20 and 30 posts, or more than
30 posts (see x-axis in Figure 3). We then calculated the
percentages of students who passed the course in each bin
(see y-axis in Figure 3).

99



Figure 1: Absolute activity and filtered activity visualized along the course

100



Figure 2: Relation between learning activities and
success

Figure 3: Relation between fora activity and success

Figure 3 shows that more activity in the fora correlates
with higher likelihood of success. This evidence is also sup-
ported by statistical analysis. The Spearman’s rank corre-
lation coefficient is significant with p-value<0.001 and ? =
0.20. However, the increased success ratio flattens out quickly
which confirms hypothesis 2.

Hypothesis 3: Active threads are key threads.
If fora activity is a relevant metric for students who passed

the course, we considered the possibility that more active
threads can have more impact on those students who passed
the course.

In order to explore this hypothesis, we have visualised in
Figure 4 the percentages of passed students per bin. These
bins are based on the number of posts that each thread con-
tains, therefore we build up bins from 0 to 10 posts, 10 to
20 post till the 140-150 bin (see x-axis in Figure 4). We
then calculated the percentages of students who passed the
course in each bin (see y-axis in Figure 4)

Figure 4 shows that most of the threads in the German
course have a success rate around 50% and in the case of the
English course around 30%.

However, Figure 4 shows that there is no apparent cor-
relation between active threads and percentages of students
who passed the courses. This evidence is also supported by
statistical analysis. The Spearman’s rank correlation coef-
ficients shows a slightly negative correlation significant for
both courses, with p-value<0.001 and ? = ?0.04 for the

Figure 4: Percentages of passed students per thread
bins (English and German Course)

English course and p-value<0.001 and ? = ?0.09 for the
German course. However, we see in Figure 4 that the last
bins contain an unusual high percentage of students who
passed the course compared with the previous bins. There-
fore, we analysed manually the content of these threads.
The last bin in the English course contains only a thread
that students used to post solutions to the assignments. In
a more ‘fair play’ way, the last bin in the German course con-
tained a thread which students posted external educational
resources.

Therefore, neither Figure 4 nor the slightly negative cor-
relation shows that active threads are a relevant metric to
explore in our courses.

3.3 RQ3: Does the use of the target language
in fora influence learning outcomes?

The use of social network tools such forum, wiki and blogs
has been widely researched in language courses [10]. The use
of the course target language seems to have positive effects
[8].

Hypothesis 1: The students who passed the course use
more frequently the target language in the fora.

In order to explore this hypothesis, we have classified all
the messages with the probability that they are written in
the target language or Spanish using UClassify [5]. The x-
axis in Figure 5 shows the probability of writing in the target
language. The y-axis contains the normalised number of
students. The red line represents the students who fail and
the blue line is the students who pass the course.

We can discard the German chart in Figure 5 because a
very low percentage of students use German in the fora. The
blue line decreases just behind of the red line. Considering
the raw data of the German course, only 1% of the users
wrote in German with higher probability than 10%. 93% of
users wrote in Spanish with higher probability than 90% .
Almost, all the students used Spanish as the communication
language in the fora.

Figure 5 shows that the target language was not used very
often in the communications. We expected this in the Ger-
man course because it is a course that does not require pre-
vious knowledge. However it looks unusual in a Professional
English course.

The evolution of the English course graph in Figure 5 is
very similar for the students who pass the courses and those
who fail. Therefore, we can say that the use of the target
language in media is not correlated with the probability of
passing the course.

101



Figure 5: Comparing success and failure in the En-
glish and German language course when students
use the target language

Considering the raw data of the English course, only 10%
of the students wrote in English with higher probability than
90%, while 67% were likely to use Spanish with a probability
higher than 90%. When we perform the Spearman’s rank
correlation test, we see that the coefficients are not strictly
significant (p-value<0.05). When we focus on absolute val-
ues, the results do not change much. Only 13% of the stu-
dents who used english with a higher possibility than 60%
passed the course.

4. CONCLUSIONS
This paper describes an exploratory analysis of two MOOCs

in the UNED COMA platform. We have presented that
the percentage of students who passed the course exclud-
ing drop-outs is around 40%. Regarding the drop-outs, the
study points out that 50% of the students drop out during
the first two units. Furthermore, whilst drop-outs are one
of the causes of the drop in the fora activity, this pattern
is also present when we consider only those students who
passed the course as well as in other non MOOCs experi-
ments.

Participating in the learning activities and fora correlates
with the probabilities of a students passing the course. Around
70% of the students that perform all the activities pass the
course. This percentage decreases close to 25% when they
only skip 10 learning activities. Moreover, our study shows
that students who are above a threshold in fora activity do
not gain any additional beneficial influence from extra ac-
tivities

Finally, we have to highlight our surprise that our analysis
points out that the use of the target languages does not
influence the probability of passing these courses.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research leading to these results has received funding

from the European Community’s Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement No 318499
- weSPOT project.

6. REFERENCES
[1] C. Alario-Hoyos, M. Pe?rez-Sanagust??n,

C. Delgado-Kloos, H. Parada G., M. Mun?oz Organero,
and A. Rodr??guez-de-las Heras. Analysing the Impact
of Built-In and External Social Tools in a MOOC on
Educational Technologies. In ECTEL’13, volume 8095
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 5–18.
Springer, 2013.

[2] M. Castro, S. Martin, D. Gago, and D. Torres.
Building communities of practice & learning through
moocs exploration. In Proceedings of the EMOOCs
2014, the Second MOOC European Stakeholders
Summit. Accepted, 2014.

[3] D. Clow. MOOCs and the funnel of participation. In
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Learning Analytics and Knowledge, LAK ’13, pages
185–189. ACM, 2013.

[4] S. Cooper and M. Sahami. Reflections on Stanford’s
MOOCs. Commun. ACM, 56(2):28–30, Feb. 2013.

[5] W. H. Fletcher. Corpus analysis of the world wide
web. The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics, 2012.

[6] P. Hill. Emerging Student Patterns in MOOCs: A
Graphical View, 2013.

[7] R. F. Kizilcec, C. Piech, and E. Schneider.
Deconstructing disengagement: analyzing learner
subpopulations in massive open online courses. In
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Learning Analytics and Knowledge, LAK ’13, pages
170–179, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.

[8] G. S. Levine. Student and Instructor Beliefs and
Attitudes about Target Language Use, First Language
Use, and Anxiety: Report of a Questionnaire Study.
The Modern Language Journal, 87(3):343–364, 2003.

[9] N. Michinov, S. Brunot, O. Le Bohec, J. Juhel, and
M. Delaval. Procrastination, participation, and
performance in online learning environments. Comput.
Educ., 56(1):243–252, Jan. 2011.

[10] T. Miyazoe and T. Anderson. Learning outcomes and
students’ perceptions of online writing: Simultaneous
implementation of a forum, blog, and wiki in an efl
blended learning setting. System, 38(2):185 – 199,
2010.

[11] J. Santos, S. Charleer, G. Parra, J. Klerkx, E. Duval,
and K. Verbert. Evaluating the use of open badges in
an open learning environment. In ECTEL’13, volume
8095 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
314–327. Springer, 2013.

102





