
Business Intelligence (BI) for Personalized Student 
Dashboards 

J. Sluijter 
Stenden University of Applied Sciences 

Rengerslaan 8 
Leeuwarden, The Netherlands 

+31-(0)6-41518842  
Jody.Sluijter@stenden.com 

M. Otten 
Stenden University of Applied Sciences 

Rengerslaan 8 
Leeuwarden, The Netherlands 

+31-(0)6-19281260 
Marloes.Otten@stenden.com 

 

 
ABSTRACT 
At Stenden University students from all over the world study 
together; all these different nationalities and cultures result in 
different ideas concerning academic success. The basis of this 
project was to develop a personalized dashboard for students via 
Microsoft Office 365 Power BI in which students can set their 
own personal KPI’s. The raw data from the Student Information 
System (SIS) was transformed into clear visualizations that will 
help students gain better insight into their academic performance. 
This information can be used either independently or in 
consultation with their student advisor.   

CCS Concepts 
• Information systems~Personalization   • Human-centered 
computing~Information visualization. 

Keywords 
Personalized Dashboards; Excel; Power Query; Grade Goals; 
Business Intelligence; Power BI. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Stenden University currently works with the Student Information 
System (SIS) “ProgressWWW” to track students’ academic 
performance. This system provides students an overview of all 
their grades presented by date along with their obtained European 
Credits (ECs) in a basic list view. The downside of this SIS is that 
at the end of their second or third year of education, there is an 
extensive list of results published which reduces readability. 
Results cannot be grouped by academic year, making it very 
difficult to get a quick overview of where the student stands. The 
system also does not show progression in terms of grade point 
average (GPA) nor an overview of credits earned towards 
graduation. Students cannot get, at-a-glance, an update of their 
own performance or insight into what credits still need to be 
completed prior to going on for example internship in their fourth 
academic year. The present system is static, and there is no 
interaction or visual modifications possible in its current form. 

 

2. PERSONAL GOALS 
Research shows that setting personal goals has a positive impact 
on the GPA (Richardson & Abraham, 2012). Personal goals are 
better known as grade goals which Locke and Latham (1990) 
define as self-assigned minimum goal standards. With the 
limitations of our current SIS in mind and the motivational aspect 
of grade goals, this project was started to give students better 
insight into their academic progression data against their own goal 
standards. At Stenden Hotel Management School (SHMS), the 
largest department of Stenden University with 2,400 students, we 
have students from many different nationalities studying together 
and to say that they all strive for the same grade goal standards is 
unrealistic. Some students may strive to achieve the highest 
possible grades and graduate Cum Laude (graduating with 
honors), while other students are satisfied with obtaining simply a 
grade sufficient to pass. A study conducted in this matter by 
Rienties et al (2011) examined the academic performance of 
international students concluding that the international students 
with a (mixed) western ethnic background obtained higher 
academic results in comparison to Dutch students. 

It is also a well-known fact that Dutch students have a different 
attitude towards studying. This is confirmed by the Netherlands 
Universities Foundation for International Cooperation (Nuffic) 
(2013) which states that Dutch students in general have a different 
attitude towards studying. According to the Nuffic (2013) Dutch 
university students are not focused on high grades, but on 
achieving the necessary requirements to obtain their degree. 
Taking all these different nationalities and cultures into 
consideration, students should be able to set their own goal 
standards in the form of key performance indicators (KPIs) and 
make sense of their own data with modest effort. 

3. INDIVIDUALIZED DASHBOARDS 
To be able to equip students with a tool that allows them to track 
their progress through visualizations as well as set their own KPIs, 
we started with constructing individualized dashboards. This 
dashboard would also allow the student to compare their 
performance with the peer group of their choice. Each dashboard 
connects the student with their academic performance data via 
their ID number in the SIS, providing them a real-time update of 
their dashboard. The dashboards are created in the Microsoft 
Office 365 Program Power BI. This system offers data 
transformations via Power Query, which allows for the creation of 
visualizations.  

Power BI is part of the Microsoft Office 365 Educator license that 
both teachers and students have access to free of charge via their 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright 2017 ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03 …$15.00. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029458 



institutional login. A nice feature is that the dashboard is 
accessible anywhere, anytime and on any device, including 
smartphones, independent of operating system. 

Using Power BI, different visualizations related to academic 
performance can be displayed in what they call ‘tiles’. Students 
can choose what they would like to display, such as the pass rate 
percentage per course or year, still to complete credits (“what am I 
missing”), already achieved grades, GPA, highest grade achieved, 
progress to degree time, what lies ahead, etc. It is up to the student 
to decide what they would like to see and what they would like to 
track. 

As mentioned before, at SHMS we have students studying at our 
campus from all over the world, each with their own academic 
goal standards. Using Power BI, the student will be able to self-
assign their own grade goals using the built-in KPI features in 
Power BI coupled with an input form developed in SharePoint. 
The goal is for them to be able to set their own KPI’s per 
visualization/ tile. This dashboard takes a ‘Personal Best’ 
approach, which will hopefully inspire and motivate the student to 
be successful in their study. 

A final feature of this dashboard will be the capability of being 
able to compare yourself with your peers. We would like to 
emphasize that this is not our main goal, but students can add this 
feature in case they find it helpful. They can compare their own 
individual result against a peer group of their choice, such as for 
example all females, or all first years, or all students from a 
certain nationality.  

To create this personalized dashboard, we needed to find a way to 
easily capture the unstructured data from the SIS and model it so 
it could be used in the visualizations.  The raw data from the SIS 
was initially not fit for purpose. However, it was adapted and 
shaped using the tools in Power BI (namely Power Query) to 
transform it into a simple data table. This whole process of 
cleaning and standardizing the data took more than a year. The 
entire dataset consisted out of 9,413 students with in total 209,919 
grade records.  The dataset represented all students registered at 
SHMS between September 2009 and September 2016.   

Once that process was completed, we used Power BI to shape and 
model the data so it could be used in visualizations. Power BI 
consists of two parts, the first is the Power BI Desktop to create 

reports and the second is the Power BI Service to pin the 
visualizations from the reports onto the dashboard and share it 
with either colleagues or students. Initially we are using manually 
refreshed Excel sheets of student data extract from the SIS, 
however in the future we plan to create a more direct link between 
Power BI and the SIS that will allow automatic updates. 

4. CONCLUSIONS 
One final remark concerning the dashboards is that this process 
covers two  of the five steps of Academic Analytics as described 
by Campbell and Oblinger (2007). With our dashboard we capture 
and report, but it is up to the student (either independently or in 
consultation with their coach/academic advisor) to predict, act and 
refine.  After the introduction of the dashboards, further research 
will be conducted on the use of the tool by students and it’s 
perceived value. 

5. REFERENCES 
[1] Campbell, J.P., and Oblinger, D.G. 2007. Academic 

Analytics. Retrieved from 
https://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/PUB6101.pdf.  

[2] Nuffic (2013), Grading systems in the Netherlands, the 
United States and the United Kingdom, retrieved from 
https://www.studyinholland.nl/documentation/grading-
systems-in-the-netherlands-the-united-states-and-the-united-
kingdom.pdf.  

[3] Richardson, M., Abraham, C., and Bond, R. 2012. 
Psychological Correlates of University Students’ Academic 
Performance: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 138, 2 (March 2012), 353-387. DOI= 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0026838. 

[4] Rienties, B., Beausaert, S., Grohnert, T., Niemandsverdriet, 
S., and Commers. 2011. Understanding academic 
performance of international students: the role of ethnicity, 
academic and social integration. Higher Education, 63, 6 
(July 2012), 685-700. DOI= 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10734-011-9468-1 

 
 
 

 



