
Peer Assessment Based on Ratings in a Social Media
Course

Andrii Vozniuk
EPFL

Lausanne, Switzerland
andrii.vozniuk@epfl.ch

Adrian Holzer
EPFL

Lausanne, Switzerland
adrian.holzer@epfl.ch

Denis Gillet
EPFL

Lausanne, Switzerland
denis.gillet@epfl.ch

ABSTRACT
Peer assessment is seen as a powerful supporting tool to achieve
scalability in the evaluation of complex assignments in large courses,
possibly virtual ones, as in the context of massive open online
courses (MOOCs). However, the adoption of peer assessment is
slow due in part to the lack of ready-to-use systems. Furthermore,
the validity of peer assessment is still under discussion. In this
paper, in order to tackle some of these issues, we present as a
proof-of-concept of a novel extension of GRAASP, a social me-
dia platform, to setup a peer assessment activity. We then report
a case study of peer assessment using GRAASP in a Social Media
course with 60 master’s level university students and analyze the
level of agreement between students and instructors in the evalu-
ation of short individual reports. Finally, to see if both instructor
and student evaluations were based on appearance of project re-
ports rather than on content, we conducted a study with 40 kids
who rated reports solely on their look. Our results convey the fact
that unlike the kid evaluation, which shows a low level of agree-
ment with instructors, student assessment is reliable since the level
of agreement between instructors and students was high.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.1 [Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in Education;
L.0.0 [Assessment / Evaluation / Measurement]: Assessment and
Evaluation

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Learning activities, social media, peer assessment, ratings, MOOCs

1. INTRODUCTION
Peer assessment can be defined as an arrangement for learners to

consider and specify the level, value, or quality of a product or per-
formance of other equal- status learners [23]. Peer assessment has

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
LAK ’14, Mar 24-28 2014, Indianapolis, IN, USA
ACM 978-1-4503-2664-3/14/03...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567574.2567608

been used as an evaluation tool in courses for several centuries [23]
and it has recently gained more attention in the context of massive
open online courses (MOOCs) [6], where it can serve as a power-
ful tool to achieve scalability in evaluation of complex assignments
with large student cohorts.

Peer assessment can also have benefits related to the quality of
learning. Several studies have shown that students can addition-
ally learn when evaluating work of other students [22], but these
findings are not universal [19]. It can also be argued that peer as-
sessment reduces the workload for instructors, saving time in the
process. However, depending on the setup and implementation
time this might not be the case. Also the fact that teachers have
to formalize the assessment process can benefit both students and
teachers as they have to clarify the educational objectives, goals
and the grading scale [23]. To be used as a replacement for instruc-
tor grading, the grades based on peer assessment should match to
the grades of instructors. Most studies evaluate the accuracy of peer
assessment as adequate compared to instructor evaluation, however
this comparison is only useful if one assumes that instructor assess-
ments are valid, which he suggests is a doubtful assumption in some
contexts [23].

Even though peer review and assessment have advantages, they
have not become a mainstream evaluation feature in universities.
Pearce et al. [16] argue that this is in part because of difficulty of
usage and price of dedicated peer review and assessment systems.
They point to online tools as promising solutions to this problem
but they deplore the fact that so few of them exist.

In this paper, in order to encourage the adoption of peer as-
sessment, we present a novel extension of a social media platform
(GRAASP), which can be used to setup a peer assessment activ-
ity. Then we report a case study of peer assessment using GRAASP
in a Social Media course taught at the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology in Lausanne (EPFL) with 60 master students and ana-
lyze the level of agreement between the assessment of students and
instructors in the evaluation of short individual reports. Our find-
ings suggest that the level of agreement is significant. Finally, to
see whether the assessment of students and instructors was solely
based on appearance and could be replicated without reading the
content of the reports, we conducted a boundary case experiment
with 40 twelve-year old kids who assessed the reports solely based
on their look. Our results show that there is no agreement between
kids and students and thus suggest that students and instructors are,
at least to some extent, influenced by the content of the report.

It should be highlighted that in the context of this social media
course, the objective of the peer assessment is twofold. First, it
aims at assessing the work of the students. Second, it aims at intro-
ducing students to the challenges and the opportunities related to
ratings in social media platforms.

133



This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses related
work. Section 3 presents how GRAASP was used for peer assess-
ment in a Social Media course. Section 4 discusses the evaluation
methodology before Section 5 presents the results. Finally Sec-
tion 6 wraps up with a conclusion and discussion of future work.

2. RELATED WORK
Hereafter we make a brief overview of previous findings on peer

assessment and present existing peer assessment systems.

2.1 Peer assessment findings
Peer assessment is generally found to be formative [16], but stu-

dents may dislike this work as they feel that this is the "teacher’s
responsibility" [1]. Cho et al. [3] found that if students were guided
and were provided scaffolds they took their job seriously and their
results where as valid as instructor ratings. This even though stu-
dents themselves do not believe their ratings are reliable.

However, these positive results are not universal [24]. For ex-
ample, Sadler and Good [19] find that even though student and in-
structor assessment are strongly correlated, they do not appear to be
linked to improved understanding and higher performing students
may suffer when graded by others.

Furthermore, both evaluations by students and instructors can be
prone to biases. For students, these biases include inexperience in
the field, inexperience in grading, and basic biases, such as rat-
ing friends favorably [7], as well as more advanced biases, such as
making pacts with others [13]. Instructors can be affected by sim-
ilar biases. For example the number of papers to grade can lead
to rushed evaluation, individual grading (one instructor) is less re-
liable than combined ratings [18], instructors can be influenced by
expectations and other biases, finally as the knowledge level of the
instructor is much higher than that of students, it might be diffi-
cult for her to distinguish between small scale differences between
students.

In the context of MOOCs, Piech et al. [17] address the problem
of peer assessment accuracy and suggest that student assessment
validity can be significantly improved with a corrective algorithm.
They also proposed to use the algorithm for more intelligent distri-
bution of assignments between graders.

2.2 Peer assessment systems
As mentioned above, there are not many available online peer

assessment systems [16]. An early, but now extinct, web-based
peer grading system, was called PG (Peer Grader) and had already
been proposed in 2001 [9].

More recently, researchers at the university of Melbourne intro-
duced PRAZE [15],a dedicated system for peer assessment. It has
been successfully evaluated in several courses. Unfortunately, it is
currently only available for Australian Universities.

TURNITIN1 is a plagiarism detection tool, which also provides
a module to allow student to comment each other’s work. Turnitin
provides both an online interface and a mobile app.

Some learning management systems (LMS) provide modules for
peer assessment. The self peer assessment (SPA) module in Black-
board is such an example.2 It is quite rigid and does not allow for
late hand ins or proxy submission. WORKSHOP in Moodle3 is also
a sophisticated tool that has been tested in large classrooms [14].
As these modules are strongly coupled to their respective LMS it
makes it their adoption difficult beyond the LMS users.

1turnitin.com
2www.niu.edu/blackboard/assess/spa.shtml
3docs.moodle.org/23/en/Workshop_module

3. CASE STUDY: SOCIAL MEDIA
We performed our evaluation in the Spring Semester 2013 dur-

ing the Social Media course at EPFL with 60 master students in
Computer Science. During this course each student had to hand
in a two-page project report to show a long-tail effect in a social
media platform chosen by him or her. In a typical example of a
project a student took IMDB4 as social media and inquired whether
“there will be a small collection of very well popular movies [...]
which have plenty reviews, against a very large collection of movies
with a very low number of reviews (which will represent our long
tail).” In order to fully immerse students into the topic, we decide
to use social media platforms to deposit course material (GRAASP),
share useful links (TWITTER), and host slides (SLIDESHARE). Fur-
thermore, we used peer assessment for the grading of the student
project as social media make extensive use of peer review systems.

Proper instructions are a key success factor for peer evaluation.
We made clear to the students at the beginning of the course that
their report will be evaluated by peers, and that they will have to
evaluated the work of about 20 peers. As the reports were dis-
cussing the long tail effect in various social media platforms, we
also made clear that their reading was a learning activity. Finally, it
was announced that the peer evaluation done by them would only
be taken into account if not deviating significantly from the eval-
uation carried out by the experts to ensure fairness. Since there is
a lack of peer assessment tools, we devised a novel extension of
GRAASP to accommodate peer assessment.

Further activities including teamwork and live presentations in
the classroom were organized but not discussed in this paper.

3.1 Graasp
GRAASP is a flexible social media platform that was initially

developed to support communities of practice and extended to sup-
port collaborative learning activities [2, 11, 12] as well as online
science labs for inquiry-based learning at school [10]. GRAASP
can be freely exploited by schools, universities and non-profit or-
ganizations for learning activities and knowledge management. In
GRAASP, people organize their personal and shared projects, in-
terests and activities into public or private contextual spaces, where
they share relevant resources and necessary apps with invited mem-
bers. For example, for the Social Media course, the instructor cre-
ated a dedicated space, named Social Media, where students would
find lecture material, such as slides or videos and administrative
information.

The design of GRAASP follows a flexible bottom-up permissions
management approach when it comes to joint projects. Instead of
having a top-level administrator in control of all project spaces,
everything is managed at the space level. Thereby in the case of
the Social Media course, students were able to create a space for
their group project, invite their group members, close the space for
others and drop documents together with other resources needed
for the project.

3.2 Peer assessment using Graasp
For the course we have developed an extension of GRAASP as

a proof-of-concept where the reviewer tasks are automated. We
are currently working on further improvements, which will allow
creating dedicated peer assessment spaces, where a summary of
all peer assessment tasks will be visible. We plan to roll out this
functionality in the coming months.

To setup the peer assessment activity, students were instructed to
create a space in GRAASP, drop their work in it, invite the instruc-

4http://www.imdb.com

134



tor, and leave the space in order to be not able to see the reviewers.
Then the instructor invited randomly assigned peers into the space
to perform the evaluation. All participants of the evaluation were
instructed to use a 5-point Likert-type scale for grading the reports.
Since the course was about social media, the grade scale was in-
spired by the ratings system often found in social media (e.g. it is
used for product review on Amazon.com):

• 5 stars: I love the report
• 4 stars: I like the report
• 3 stars: The report is OK
• 2 stars: I don’t like the report
• 1 star: I hate the report

Peers were instructed to focus on the following list of criteria
when evaluating the reports:

• Is the report about a social media?
• Is the long tail hypothesis clear?
• Is the collected dataset representative?
• Is the report technically advanced?
• Is the report well written?
• Is it interesting and creative?

We did not collect the grades regarding each of the criteria in-
dependently, but recorded one final grade per report. Once the
reviewers completed their task, the instructor was able to see the
average result of the peer evaluation as well as the detailed grades
distribution as depicted in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Rating details for a report in Graasp

3.3 Reviewers
The peer assessment activity was performed by three groups of

reviewers: instructors, students and kids. The group of instruc-
tors consisted of the two lecturers and the two teaching assistants.
Each of the instructors graded all the reports. The group of stu-
dents consisted of all 60 students in the Social Media course (age
23-28). Each of the students was instructed to grade 20 randomly
assigned reports. The group of kids consisted of 40 schoolchildren
(age 10-12), each kid graded 15 randomly assigned reports. This
assignment procedure ended in each report being assigned to 4 in-
structors, 20 students and 10 kids.

Note that the idea behind assigning a peer assessment task to kids
was to see whether they could predict the grades of instructors and
students by the appearance alone without reading them and under-
standing the content. To perform this boundary case experiment,
the kids did not use GRAASP to rate the two-page reports, instead
they were each given 15 small 5.83 x 4.13 inch (14.8 x 10.5 cm)
cards with the reports printed on them as shown in Figure 2. Most
of the text of in the reports was too small to be read by the kids and
most of them did not understand English.

Figure 2: Example of a report card for kids

4. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
To evaluate the validity of the peer assessment we analyzed the

level of agreement in grades between instructors and students.

Measuring group consensus. In the analysis we focused on the
level of agreement between groups. Unfortunately, reliable inter-
group agreement measures are still lacking [25]. Hence, a common
practice is to first define a consensus in each group of raters and in
this way to reduce the problem of measuring inter-group agreement
to the problem of measuring inter-rater agreement. The consensus
is often defined as the median or the mean for ordinal scales or as
the mode (modal category) for nominal scales [25]. Since in our
study we employed five-star grade ordinal scale, we selected the
mean as consensus value. In the context of the Social Media course,
this consensus value also had a pedagogical sense as it could be
seen as an instance of the wisdom of the crowd, a frequently used
concept in social media (e.g. Wikipedia).

Measuring correlation between group consensuses. In order to
get a first visual idea of the agreement between groups, consensus
values can be represented on scatter plots together with regression
lines with 90% confidence intervals for the regression slope.

Then to get a numerical figure of the dependency of the con-
sensus values, we computed the Pearson correlation and the Spear-
man rank correlation [21] coefficients. In general correlation does
not show the level of agreement, it just shows the level of asso-
ciation between variables. It is possible that grades of two raters
are strongly correlated (Pearson or Spearman), but at the same time
they can have little agreement. Thus correlation is not suitable for
measuring the level of inter-rater agreement. Based on the liter-
ature, Cohen’s kappa [5] is the adequate tool for our purpose as
it is frequently used in behavioural sciences to compute inter-rater
agreement.

135



Measuring agreement between group consensuses.
The original version of Cohen’s kappa targets nominal variables

and assumes that all disagreements are equal. This is not the case in
our study, where disagreement can differ in severity. Therefore we
use Cohen’s weighted kappa [4], a statistic suitable for measuring
the level of inter-rater agreement on ordinal scale. Note that as a
measure of reliability, the weighted kappa is equal [8] to the intra-
class correlation coefficient (ICC), a common measure of reliability
of either different raters, or different items on a scale [20].

5. EVALUATION RESULTS
We followed the evaluation methodology presented in the pre-

vious section to measure level of agreement between two groups
of reviewers: (1) instructors and students, as well as, (2) kids and
students.

A sample of five reports from the dataset is presented in Figure 3
and shows the per-report consensus values. Note that the discrep-
ancy between the number of assigned students per report (20) and
the actual number of grades is due to the fact that some students did
not complete the evaluation assignment. In the end, more than 92%
evaluation assignments were completed. We are currently prepar-
ing the dataset used in this study and plan to publish it online to-
gether with the analysis so it can be repeated.

Figure 3: data excerpt representing consensus grades

5.1 Students vs instructors
Hereafter, we compare the student and the instructor assessment

in terms of correlation and agreement.

Correlation. The visual representation of the data on the scatter
plot in Figure 4 indicates that grades of students for reports increase
with the grades of instructors.

Figure 4: A scatter plot of instructor grades vs student grades
with a linear regression line and 90% slope confidence intervals

Indeed, the results of the correlation analysis presented in Fig-
ure 5 point out that there is a strong (0.825) linear dependence be-
tween grades of students and instructors with a low significance
level of the null hypothesis (independence of grades), which allows

to reject it. The strong positive Spearman correlation (0.752) in-
dicates that students tend to give higher grades for better reports,
i.e., reports that received higher grades from instructors. Due to
the strong correlation, grades provided by students can be used to
predict the grades of instructors.

Figure 5: Pearson and Spearman correlations together with
significance levels of the null hypothesis

Agreement. To measure the level of agreement, we computed Co-
hen’s weighted kappa, presented in Figure 6. When comparing stu-
dents and instructors, the weighted kappa equals to 0.774, which
can be interpreted as a strong agreement. The significance level
(1.36E-13) indicates that the null hypothesis (that there is no agree-
ment) can be rejected and the agreement between students and in-
structors is statistically significant. The 95% confidence interval is
rather narrow and in the high agreement area. Since the agreement
is high, we can use just one rater (in our case a consensus decision
of students) to provide the grade.

Figure 6: Weighted Kappa, 95% confidence intervals and sig-
nificance levels of the null hypothesis

5.2 Students vs Kids
Hereafter, we compare the student and the kid assessment in

terms of correlation and agreement.

Correlation. The scatter plot in Figure 7 indicates that linear de-
pendency between the grades of students and kids is weak.

Figure 7: Scatter plot of kid grades vs student grades with a
linear regression line and 90% slope confidence intervals

For instance, the graph shows that reports that received grade
close to 4 from students, received anything from 2 to 4.5 from kids.
The results of the correlation analysis presented in Figure 5 indicate

136



that there is a weak (0.201) linear dependency between grades of
students and kids. The significance level (0.124) indicates that the
null hypothesis (independence of grades) cannot be rejected. A
similar picture is observed for Spearman rank correlation. The low
value of the Spearman rank correlation (0.205) indicates that the
monotonic relation between grades of students and kids is weak.
That is when students give a high grade for a report it is probable
that kids can give low grade for the same report. So their grades
are not reliable. The weak correlation can also be interpreted as an
indicator that students pay attention to the content of reports and
are able to evaluate it. They do not base their conclusion solely
on the visual representation. In order to confirm this hypothesis
additional scrutiny is required to be able to remove other factors
that could have influenced the grading process.

Agreement. When comparing students and kids in Figure 6, the
weighted kappa equals 0.196, which indicates no agreement or an
agreement by chance. The significance level (0.065) of the null
hypothesis (independence of grades) indicates that it cannot be re-
jected. Thus there is significant evidence that the grades of students
and kids are not in a agreement.

6. CONCLUSION
Peer assessment is a timely and challenging topic. In this paper,

in order to tackle the lack of existing peer assessment systems, we
presented a novel extension of GRAASP, devised for that purpose.
We also discussed our experience using GRAASP for peer assess-
ment in a Social Media course.

To see whether the assessment of students and instructors was
mostly based on appearance of project reports and could be repli-
cated without reading the content of the reports, we conducted an
experiment with kids who assessed the reports solely based on their
look. Our analysis showed that there is a strong agreement between
grades assigned by students and instructors and little agreement be-
tween grades by students and kids. These results were obtained
from a well-defined evaluation scenario and a large number of re-
viewers for a single report (20 peers). This number will however
be reduced to 15 in the next academic year to take into account
students’ feedback. These results encourage us to further extend
the peer assessment features in GRAASP and to further evaluate the
impact of peer assessment in our courses, not only as an evaluation
mean, but also as a learning activity.

Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank Alexandra Holzer for carrying out
the field experiment with her pupils.

7. REFERENCES
[1] J. Biggs and C. Tang. Teaching for quality learning at

university. McGraw-Hill International, 2011.
[2] E. Bogdanov, F. Limpens, N. Li, S. E. Helou, C. Salzmann,

and D. Gillet. A social media platform in higher education.
In EDUCON’12, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2012.

[3] K. Cho, C. D. Schunn, and R. W. Wilson. Validity and
reliability of scaffolded peer assessment of writing from
instructor and student perspectives. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 98(4):891, 2006.

[4] J. Cohen. Weighted kappa: Nominal scale agreement
provision for scaled disagreement or partial credit.
Psychological bulletin, 70(4):213, 1968.

[5] J. Cohen et al. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales.
Educational and psychological measurement, 20(1):37–46,
1960.

[6] S. Cooper and M. Sahami. Reflections on stanford’s moocs.
Commun. ACM, 56(2):28–30, Feb. 2013.

[7] W. T. Dancer and J. Dancer. Peer rating in higher education.
Journal of Education for Business, 67(5):306–309, 1992.

[8] J. L. Fleiss and J. Cohen. The equivalence of weighted kappa
and the intraclass correlation coefficient as measures of
reliability. Educational and psychological measurement,
1973.

[9] E. F. Gehringer. Electronic peer review and peer grading in
computer-science courses. In ACM SIGCSE Bulletin,
volume 33, pages 139–143. ACM, 2001.

[10] S. Govaerts, Y. Cao, A. Vozniuk, A. Holzer, D. G. Zutin,
E. S. C. Ruiz, L. Bollen, S. Manske, N. Faltin, C. Salzmann,
E. Tsourlidaki, and D. Gillet. Towards an online lab portal
for inquiry-based stem learning at school. In ICWL’13,
244–253, pages 244–253. 2013.

[11] N. Li, S. E. Helou, and D. Gillet. Using social media for
collaborative learning in higher education: a case study. In
ACHI’12, pages 285–290, 2012.

[12] N. Li, C. Ullrich, S. E. Helou, and D. Gillet. Using social
software for teamwork and collaborative project
management in higher education. In ICWL’10, pages
161–170. Springer, 2010.

[13] B. P. Mathews. Assessing individual contributions:
Experience of peer evaluation in major group projects.
British J. of Educational Technology, 25(1):19–28, 1994.

[14] M. Mostert and J. D. Snowball. Where angels fear to tread:
online peer-assessment in a large first-year class. Assessment
& Evaluation in Higher Education, pages 1–13, 2012.

[15] R. A. Mulder and J. M. Pearce. Praze: Innovating teaching
through online peer review. In Ascilite’07, pages 727–736,
2007.

[16] J. Pearce, R. Mulder, and C. Baik. Involving students in peer
review: Case studies and practical strategies for university
teaching. Centre for the Study of Higher Education,
University of Melbourne, 2009.

[17] C. Piech, J. Huang, Z. Chen, C. Do, A. Ng, and D. Koller.
Tuned models of peer assessment in moocs. In EDM’13,
153-160.

[18] R. Rosenthal and R. Rosnow. Essentials of behavioural
research. McGraw-Hill, 1991.

[19] P. M. Sadler and E. Good. The impact of self-and
peer-grading on student learning. Educational assessment,
11(1):1–31, 2006.

[20] P. E. Shrout and J. L. Fleiss. Intraclass correlations: uses in
assessing rater reliability. Psychological bulletin, 86(2):420,
1979.

[21] C. Spearman. The proof and measurement of association
between two things. The American journal of psychology,
15(1):72–101, 1904.

[22] K. Topping. Peer assessment between students in colleges
and universities. Review of Educational Research,
68(3):249–276, 1998.

[23] K. J. Topping. Peer assessment. Theory into Practice,
48(1):20–27, 2009.

[24] M. van Zundert, D. Sluijsmans, and J. van Merriënboer.
Effective peer assessment processes: Research findings and
future directions. Learning and Instruction, 20(4):270 – 279,
2010.

[25] S. Vanbelle. Agreement between raters and groups of raters.
PhD thesis, Université de Liège, 2009.

137





