
Workshop on Integrated Learning Analytics of MOOC Post-
Course Development

Yuan Wang 
Columbia University 
New York, NY, USA 

elle.wang@columbia.edu 
 

Dan Davis 
Delft University of Technology 

The Netherlands 
d.j.davis@tudelft.nl 

Luc Paquette 
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 

Champaign, IL, USA 
lpaq@illinois.edu 

 

Guanliang Chen 
Delft University of Technology 

The Netherlands 
Guanliang.chen@tudelft.nl 

 
 

ABSTRACT 
MOOC research is typically limited to evaluations of learner 
behavior in the context of the learning environment. However, some 
research has begun to recognize that the impact of MOOCs may 
extend beyond the confines of the course platform or conclusion of 
the course time limit. This workshop aims to encourage our 
community of learning analytics researchers to examine the 
relationship between performance and engagement within the course 
and learner behavior and development beyond the course. This 
workshop intends to build awareness in the community regarding 
the importance of research measuring multi-platform activity and 
long-term success after taking a MOOC.  We hope to build the 
community’s understanding of what it takes to operationalize 
MOOC learner success in a novel context by employing data traces 
across the social web.  

CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing ?  Computer – assisted instruction; 
Interactive learning environments   

Keywords 
Learning analytics; massive online open courses; long-term learning 
development; learning outcomes; career development 

1. WORKSHOP BACKGROUND 
1.1 Challenges in assessing MOOC Learner Success 
        MOOC learners access course content in an asynchronous and 
unconstrained fashion [3, 12]. This has resulted in fragmented data 
scattered outside of the course platform and beyond the course-
offering window, causing challenges of collecting learner data. As a 
result, much research in MOOCs focuses on learner achievement and 
engagement during the course itself, leaving the area of post-course 
student longitudinal development relatively untouched. This 
lopsidedness in MOOC research reduces our understanding of the 
role that MOOCs can play in 21st-century learning.   
       It is observed that the narrative on MOOCs has shifted from 
overwhelmingly optimistic from 2011 to 2014 to substantially more 
critical in 2015 [12]. One concern is that it is not clear how well 
MOOCs support student learning and career development in 
response to changing societal needs [6]. The development of 

technology and scale of online education considerably outpace 
efforts to evaluate and understand how well it is succeeding at 
improving outcomes. The predominant focus of studying MOOC 
completion without considering learners’ longitudinal development 
overlooks the possible role that MOOCs may play in the long-term 
professional development of many of their users.  
      Responding to the this challenge, an emerging trend has been 
seen on identifying and tracking MOOC learner development outside 
of the course platform and beyond the conclusion of the course [1, 
13], such as tracking learner activities on relevant social web 
platforms, measuring learner post-course development on career 
advancement, and measuring leaner participation in communities of 
practice related to the MOOCs they engage with. 

 
1.2 Post- MOOC Development 
 1.2.1 MOOCs and Continued Learning Activities 
       Currently, the most popular approaches adopted by researchers 
to evaluate a MOOC's success is to measure its learners course 
engagement and performance. Although this can provide us with 
some insights, some researchers argue that students' post-course 
learning activities should also be tracked and analyzed to gain a 
better understanding of learner behavior. 
      One key aspect in these post-course learning activities is to what 
extent learners apply the knowledge they acquired from a MOOC in 
practice (i.e., learning transfer). One example of such research comes 
from Chen et al. [1] which targeted the learners from a MOOC 
teaching functional programming in edX and analyzed the data they 
generated in both edX and GitHub, a social repository for 
programmers to store and share code. They found a small percentage 
of learners began using the taught language who had never used it 
before and continued to do so after the course ended.  
      In addition to measuring learning transfer, another interesting 
aspect to investigate is whether learners continue to study the MOOC 
subject or related topics after the end of the course. Just as Chen et 
al. [1] used GitHub to measure learning transfer, Chen et al. [2] 
analyzed learners' data left in StackOveflow, a social platform for 
programmers to ask and answer questions, and observed that some 
learners continued asking relevant questions after the course 
finished. Moreover, some of them even changed their role from 
"learner" to "teacher" by answering these questions. As learners' 
continued learning activities are greatly diverse, we here identify a 
need for new approaches to identify and measure such behavior. 
 
1.2.2 MOOCs and Career Development 
     Instead of pursuing a degree in a traditional school setting, a 
considerable percentage of MOOC learners are seeking career 
advancement through taking MOOCs [5]. Some MOOC learners opt 
to display their MOOC certificates on their Linkedin profiles [2]. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this 
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029430 



     In addition to showing interests in accumulating competency, 
many MOOC learners have also expressed explicit goals of changing 
their careers. For instance, recent studies on MOOC learner 
motivation suggest that a substantial proportion of learners register 
for a MOOC with an intention of changing their job [9]. Proactively 
seeking to change one’s current job is correlated with higher 
perceived employability by employers [7].  
      More recently, Dillahunt and colleagues [5] conducted a survey 
and found out that enhancing employability was a key reason why 
many learners enroll in MOOCs. They categorized desired career 
advancement for MOOC learners into four types: transition into a 
new field; promotion in their current fields; obtaining new position 
in current fields; and improving current job skills. However, while 
learners have the goal of increasing their employability and many 
employers are interested in prospective employees’ MOOC 
experience [9], there is not yet much evidence of post-course career 
improvement as a result of taking a MOOC.   

 
1.2.3 MOOCs and Communities of Practice 
      In addition to post-course development analyzed on the 
individual level, development of a community of practice 
complements the development of individual learners. This can be 
particularly relevant for a MOOC in an emerging field since the field 
needs to attract new members in order for it to grow and develop. 
Communities of practice refer to groups of people who share a 
common interest and learn how to enrich a shared repertoire of their 
practice via joint activities [10]. Learning transcends personal 
knowledge acquisition and becomes a dynamic, interconnected bank 
of knowledge shared among community members [11]. Becoming a 
member of a community of practice is also considered beneficial to 
career advancement on the individual level [4], for example, by 
moving from being a novice to a full practitioner in the community. 
The emergence of virtual media further extended the realm of 
communities of practice [8].  
       MOOCs, as a virtual learning venue, often connect to a 
community of practice around the domain of the MOOC’s content. 
For example, a MOOC teaching methods in the emerging field of 
educational data mining (EDM) is likely to attract learners who are 
interested in joining the community of practice composed by the 
field of EDM. MOOC learners can be perceived as aspiring 
practitioners in this community of practice. With their lack of 
entrance restrictions, MOOCs can provide a new space to facilitate 
legitimate peripheral participation. For an emerging field, fostering 
development of the community of practice can be crucial, and there 
is initial evidence that some MOOC participants join relevant 
scientific societies during or immediately after participating in a 
MOOC [13].  This development does not stop at the moment when 
the course concludes. Therefore, studying the development of 
MOOC participants as members of the community of practice after 
the MOOC concludes can be a valuable lens for understanding the 
impact of the MOOC.  

2. WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES 
      This workshop aims to generate awareness in the community 
that considering learner data beyond the course platform and course-
offering window can uncover previously unconsidered learning 
behaviors.  
     As such, in adopting and developing this integrated learning 
analytics approach, the overall goal of the present workshop is to 
bring together researchers and practitioners from different 
disciplines and areas of expertise to herald a new MOOC research 
branch on tracking and analyzing longitudinal MOOC learner 
development.  
      Presentations on finished, ongoing, and proposed studies, as 
well as facilitated discussion sessions are planned to develop a 
preliminary framework to illustrate the current development of the 
field and to inspire attendees to come up with exciting new lines of 

research of their own. Toward building this framework, the 
following guiding questions are included: 

• Data source: Where and how can learner post-
development data be collected? 

• Tools: What analytical tools are useful in analyzing 
datasets merged from multiple sources? 

• Methods: What analytical methods have been used? What 
other methods can be applied? 

• Generalizability: What kind of practices and findings are 
domain-general or not? 

• Applicability: How can research findings translate into 
actionable insights for various stakeholders (learners, 
instructors, administrators, investors, etc.)? 

3. REFERENCES 
 [1]   Chen, G., Davis, D., Hauff, C., & Houben, G. J. 2016. 

Learning Transfer: Does It Take Place in MOOCs? An 
Investigation into the Uptake of Functional Programming in 
Practice. In Proceedings of the Third (2016) ACM Conference 
on Learning@ Scale (pp. 409-418).  

[2]   Chen, G., Davis, D., Lin, J., Hauff, C., & Houben, G. J. 2016. 
Beyond the MOOC platform: gaining insights about learners 
from the social web. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM 
Conference on Web Science (pp. 15-24). ACM. 

[3]   DeBoer, J., Stump, G. S., Seaton, D., Ho, A., Pritchard, D. E., & 
Breslow, L. 2013, July. Bringing student backgrounds online: 
MOOC user demographics, site usage, and online learning. In 
Educational Data Mining 2013. 

[4]  DeFillippi, R. J., & Arthur, M. B. 1994. The boundaryless 
career: A competency?based perspective. Journal of 
organizational behavior, 15(4), 307-324. 

[5]  Dillahunt, T. R., Ng, S., Fiesta, M., & Wang, Z. 2016. Do 
Massive Open Online Course Platforms Support Employability? 
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing. ACM. 

[6]  Ferguson, R., Sharples, M., &  Beale, R. 2015. MOOCs 2030: a 
future for massive open online learning. In: C. J. Bonk, M. M. 
Lee, T.C. Reeves & T. H. Reynolds (Eds.), MOOCs and Open 
Education around the World (pp. 315–326). Abingdon: 
Routledge  

[7] Fugate, M., Kinicki, A. J., & Ashforth, B. E. 2004. 
Employability: A psycho-social construct, its dimensions, and 
applications. Journal of Vocational behavior, 65(1), 14-38. 

[8]   Johnson, C. M. 2001. A survey of current research on online 
communities of practice. The internet and higher 
education, 4(1), 45-60. 

 [9] Kizilcec, R. F., & Schneider, E. 2015. Motivation as a lens to 
understand online learners: Toward data-driven design with the 
OLEI scale. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction (TOCHI), 22(2), 6. 

[10] Lave, J. 1991. Situating learning in communities of  
practice. Perspectives on socially shared cognition, 2, 63-82. 

 [11] Lave, J., & Wenger, E. 2002. Legitimate peripheral 
participation in communities of practice. Supporting lifelong 
learning, 1, 111-126. 

 [12] Siemens, G. 2015. The role of MOOCs in the future of 
education. MOOCs and Open Education Around the World. C. 
J. Bonk, M.M. Lee, T. C. Reeves, & T, H, Reynolds. (Eds.). 
New York, NY: Routledge. 

 [13] Wang, Y., Paquette, L., Baker, R. 2014. A longitudinal study 
on learner career advancement in MOOCs. Journal of Learning 
Analytics, 1 (3), 203–206. 



