
Honing in on Social Learning Networks in MOOC Forums: 
Examining Critical Network Definition Decisions 

Alyssa Friend Wise 
New York University 

82 Washington Square East, 7th Floor 
New York, NY 10003 USA 

 1-212-998-5348 
alyssa.wise@nyu.edu 

Yi Cui 
Simon Fraser University 

250-13450 102nd Avenue 
Surrey, B.C. V3T 0A3 Canada 

 1-778-782-8046 
yca231@sfu.ca

Wan Qi Jin 
Simon Fraser University 

250-13450 102nd Avenue 
Surrey, B.C. V3T 0A3 Canada 

 1-778-782-8046 
wanqij@sfu.ca 

 
ABSTRACT 
This study examines the impact of content-based network 
partitioning and tie definition on social network structures and 
interpretation for MOOC discussion forums. Using dynamic 
interrelated post and thread categorization [5] based on a 
previously developed natural language model [27], 817 threads 
containing 3124 discussion posts from 567 learners in a MOOC 
on the use of statistics in medicine were characterized as either 
related to the learning of course content or not. Content-related, 
non-content, and unpartitioned interaction networks were 
constructed based on five different tie definitions: Direct Reply, 
Star, Direct Reply+Star, Limited Copresence, and Total 
Copresence. Results showed content-related and non-content 
networks to have distinct characteristics at the network, 
community, and individual node levels, validating the usefulness 
of the content/non-content distinction as an analytic tool. Network 
properties were less sensitive to differences in tie definition with 
the exception of Total Copresence, which showed distinct 
characteristics presenting dangers for general use, but usefulness 
for detecting inflated social status due to “superthread” initiation.   

CCS Concepts 
• Applied computing~E-learning 

Keywords 
Massive open online courses; social network analysis; discussion 
forum; network partitioning; tie extraction 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Massive open online courses (MOOCs) present many exciting 
opportunities for expanding learning by opening up accessibility 
to college-style courses while at the same time bringing together 
self-selected ‘students’ from all over the world. However, these 
online learning environments have faced substantial challenges 
including low completion rates and less than satisfactory learning 
experiences in many cases [11; 16]. One commonly cited 
shortcoming contributing to these problems is the lack of social 
interaction in MOOCs [21]. Interaction is an important element of 
quality in online learning generally [25] and of particular 

importance for engagement in MOOCs [16], therefore increasing 
interaction is a promising route for addressing the challenges in 
completion and satisfaction.   
While interaction is a worthy goal, the tremendous numbers of 
students involved and the diversity in learner backgrounds, needs 
and intents effectively prohibit sufficient interaction of the 
conventional student-to-instructor form. Many MOOCs therefore 
rely on peer-to-peer communication as the primary vehicle for 
interaction [15], with online discussion forums serving as the 
central medium. Despite the potential for peer interaction to 
improve student experiences and learning, the actual benefits of 
MOOC discussion forums reaped thusfar are questionable. First, 
MOOC discussions are often plagued by a host of problems that 
prevent them from meeting their full potential. These problems 
include low levels of participation [2], overwhelming quantity and 
disorganization of posts [19], and a lack of responsivity between 
learners [1]. Second, examinations of the relationship between 
MOOC forum participation and learning outcomes have yielded 
mixed and contradictory findings [12; 23]. These two issues have 
prompted intense interest in investigating the interactions 
occurring in MOOC forums and their relationship to learning (e.g. 
[7; 8; 12; 15]). One common tool used in such studies is social 
network analysis (SNA). SNA is a useful method to investigate 
interaction in online discussion because of its focus on the 
connections between actors [3; 29]. However, MOOC forum 
discussions differ from those in conventional online learning 
environments in several important ways. Specifically, there is an 
exponentially greater number of learners interacting in perpetually 
different configurations in a relatively unstructured activity for a 
broad range of purposes [17]. Thus there is a need to apply SNA 
methods in ways that take into account the complexity and distinct 
characteristics of MOOC discussion activities. 
One notable characteristic of activities in MOOC discussion 
forums is that the discussion posts are made on highly diversified 
topics. Unlike more traditional formal online learning discussion 
forums which are usually designed and used for targeted 
discussions about the course content, MOOC discussion forums 
are generally open and thus host posts on topics ranging from 
clarification of course content to logistical questions about 
assignments, and from sharing deep personal connections with the 
learning material to lightweight social interactions [24]. The 
diversity of forum activities offers one possible explanation for 
the lack of clear relationship to learning outcomes found thus far, 
as different mode of interaction may serve different purposes. For 
example, discussions directly about the course content can play a 
different role in the learning process than those of a social nature 
[26]. Distinctions may be more nuanced as well; for example past 
work from the higher education literature indicates that 
academically-related social interactions are more impactful for 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org. LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada © 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027446 



retention than purely social ones [18]. This highlights network 
partitioning as a critical but under-addressed research area in 
applying SNA to MOOC discussion forum data. 
Another notable characteristic of MOOC discussion forum is the 
diversity of participation configurations. Unlike in formal online 
learning environments where learners generally participate in 
consistent ways with a regular group of people following 
requirements set by the course, MOOC learners can initiate, join 
or abandon discussions at any time and for any reason. These 
different conditions lead to a voluminous number of threads of 
vastly different sizes with shifting configurations of participants. 
This in turn has implications for the meaning of and what should 
be taken as an indication of “interaction”, and makes defining the 
nature of social ties in these environments even more challenging 
than in conventional online learning environments. MOOC studies 
that use SNA methods have adopted several different tie 
definitions to conceptualize and operationalize social ties [9; 30]; 
however there has not yet been a clear articulation of the typology 
of these different definitions, the rationales for them, and the 
implications for the results and interpretations of the analysis. 
This study addresses the two underexplored areas of network 
partitioning and tie definition by empirically comparing different 
approaches for conceptualizing and constructing social networks 
from MOOC discussion forum data. 

2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
2.1 SNA and MOOC Discussion Forums 
SNA has been useful in studying MOOC discussions because of 
its ability to extract patterns of connections between learners. It 
has been used to generate understanding about the general 
characteristics of social networks in MOOC discussions and 
explore their relationship with learning. For instance, [15] studied 
the structure of peer support networks formed in two MOOCs 
designed for educators (on digital learning and mathematics 
learning) and examined factors that might account for such 
structures. The discussions in each course were studied as a single 
network of interaction with a directed edgelist constructed based 
on the exact reply structure. The study found some cross-course 
consistency in general network measures and participation 
patterns: both networks had clear core-periphery structure and low 
edge weight; learners’ participation fell into four patterns, 
including mutual interactions, extensive but non-mutual 
interactions, thread initiation, and unresponded interaction 
attempts; reciprocity was found in both networks. However, the 
associations between network connections and demographic 
factors were largely inconsistent across courses: the tendency that 
learners connect more with those who have the same activity 
pattern, teach at the same schooling level (elementary vs high 
school), or live in the same state or country were only found in the 
course on digital learning.  
[14] also investigated the factors that influence social connections. 
The study was conducted on two instances of a programming 
MOOC, offered in English and Spanish respectively. A directed 
social network was extracted from the whole forum, based on the 
exact reply structure. Like [15], this work found some consistent 
cross-offering results, such as reciprocity and performance-based 
homophily; they also failed to find cross-offering consistency in 
the association between social connection and learner’s similarity 
in geographical location. In the same study, [14] examined the 
association between social centrality degree (the number of direct 
connections a node has), closeness (average of the shortest path 
lengths from a node to all other nodes in the network), 

betweenness (the number of times a node is part of the shortest 
path between any two other nodes in the network) and academic 
performance (operationalized as completion and distinction). 
Weighted degree was found to be significantly associated with 
learning outcome across offerings; effect of betweenness and 
closeness were only found in the Spanish offering.  
[12] also examined associations between social centrality and 
academic performance (operationalized as no certificate, 
completion, or distinction). They conducted the study on MOOCs 
in algebra and finance. Undirected social networks were extracted 
from the whole discussion forums based on copresence in the 
same thread or subthread (how these distinctions were made was 
not explained). The results found from the two courses were 
inconsistent: degree and betweenness were positively correlated 
with learning performance in the algebra course while no 
significant correlation was found between any centrality index and 
learning performance in the finance course. Contradicting to the 
findings of [14], [12] found learners tend to talk to those who are 
in different performance groups than themselves. 
In summary, these studies’ findings about social networks and 
learning are largely inconsistent or contradictory. One possible 
explanation is MOOC discussion forums are used for highly 
diversified purposes, such as understanding learning materials, 
clarifying course policy, and developing social connections [4; 
24]. Consequently, analyzing the discussion forum as one social 
network may compile interactions with distinct natures together, 
confounding relationships and concealing important patterns. 
Another possible explanation relates to the different decisions 
made around how to define ties in the network. 
2.2 Partitioning Social Networks 
2.2.1 Exogenous Partitioning  
To address the problems with studying MOOC discussion forum 
as a whole network, some researchers have examined the 
interactions and networks in a more refined manner by paying 
specific attentions to defining network boundaries. One 
straightforward approach to doing so uses the presence of sub-
forum designations for categorization. For example, [7] created an 
exogenously defined boundary by partitioning the social network 
in a business MOOC based on the presence of seven sub-forums, 
including Readings, Lectures, Cases, Final Project, Course 
Material Feedback, Technical Feedback, and Study Groups. [7] 
also examined sub-forum networks week by week. The networks 
were extracted based on copresence within a thread. It was found 
although all sub-forum networks followed a similar trend in 
structural shift across the different weeks (from centralized to 
dispersed), they differed in several ways: sub-forums were 
participated in largely by distinct groups of learners and only a 
small percentage of learners participated across sub-forums; 
participants in different sub-forums showed different levels of 
persistence over time, with the Cases sub-forum for discussing 
learning material showing the highest level of persistence.  
In another study, [8] explored how social network structures 
influenced information diffusion in two successive offerings of a 
business MOOC. Social networks were extracted based on 
copresence in thread and partitioned based on eight sub-forums, 
including Readings, Lectures, Cases, Final Project, Questions for 
Professor, Course Material Feedback, Technical Feedback, and 
Study Groups. In addition, networks formed based only on 
frequent ties were compared with the unfiltered networks. 
Interesting cross-offering results were found. First, in both 
offerings, the proportion of one-off ties (edges with a weight of 



one) was different across sub-forums: the Feedback sub-forum 
(containing posts mostly related to technical support and gratitude 
expressions) had the highest proportion of one-off ties while the 
Cases sub-forum had the fewest. This indicates learners’ 
engagement in different types of sub-forum activities follow 
different conventions. Second, sub-forums demonstrated different 
densities of interaction: the Cases and Final Project sub-forums 
were more cohesive than the Study Groups sub-forum; as a result, 
information diffusion efficiency also differed across sub-forums. 
Taken together, these results indicate that patterns of interaction 
vary across different kinds of forum activities; notably there 
seemed to be key differences between sub-forums whose purpose 
directly related to the learning of course content and those which 
did not. In yet another example, [10] used sub-forums to explore 
social networks in a finance MOOC. They mapped networks in 
sub-forums dedicated to content-related issues (lectures, exercises 
and quizzes) and investigated user roles from both social and 
semantic perspectives. 
These studies examined networks in MOOC forums in a more 
nuanced way by partitioning the whole forum into the component 
sub-forums. However, segmenting networks in a structural way 
based on sub-forums is non-optimal for two reasons. First, each 
MOOC sets different course-specific sub-forums, therefore the 
generalizability of findings based on such divisions are limited. 
Second, prior studies have shown that cross posting is common in 
MOOCs [22]. Thus, there is no guarantee that learners make posts 
in the appropriate designated sub-forum. Consequently, social 
networks built based on sub-forums may not accurately reflect the 
nature of relationships formed in forum interactions.  

2.2.2 Endogenous Partitioning 
In contrast to using sub-forums as pre-defined boundaries, [6] 
created an endogenous boundary by conducting separate network 
analyses for all learners and only active learners that made >4 
posts. [6] looked at learners’ language characteristics and 
examined social networks from the perspectives of learning 
performance and social position in a MOOC on infrastructure. 
The social network was constructed based on the direct reply 
structure. By analyzing learners’ discussion forum contributions, 
they selected five discourse dimensions to focus on: narrativity, 
deep cohesion, referential cohesion, syntactic simplicity, and word 
concreteness. They then conducted mixed-effects modeling to 
identify the association between discourse features and social 
centrality (indexed by degree, closeness, and betweenness), as 
well as the association between discourse features and the final 
course grade. In conducting these analyses they compared results 
computed separately for all forum users and the group of active 
users. Discourse features were found useful for predicting 
learners’ performance and social centrality, and the model worked 
better for active users than for all users. It was also found learners 
with higher social centrality had different discourse features than 
those with higher performance, such as lower referential cohesion, 
less abstract words and simple syntactic structure. The distinction 
between socially central learners and high performers and the 
association of the social learners with features indicting more 
superficial discourse dramatically indicates the need to consider 
forum activities directly related to the learning of course content 
and those that focused on social purposes separately.  
In another study, [20] also focused on the type of activities 
learners participated in while examining the development of social 
networks and analyzed separately all users and the group of 
regular users who participated in at least three weeks in a MOOC 
on solar energy. An undirected social network was extracted 

based on copresence in the thread. Adding an additional layer of 
endogenous boundaries to their network, they classified the posts 
contributed by regular users into five categories: “cognitive task” 
(comments about quizzes and assignment), “social task” (learner 
emotions about tasks), “cognitive non-task” (learners engage with 
subject outside of assignments), “social non-task” (purely social 
aspects), and an additional category for administrative and 
technical issues. They then analyzed what qualitative attributes 
were associated with regular participants’ network formation. 
First, regular users were found to have different social networks 
than all learners when examined at both the individual and group 
levels. Second, social non-task and cognitive task were the 
dominant type of posts in the discussion forum. [20] also found 
the topic of conversations were not significant for network 
formation modeling. The authors suggested this might have to do 
with the fact that the importance of topics may vary in different 
stages in the course, but interactions in different course stages 
were not modeled separately.   

Findings from the above two studies as well as [7] and [8] 
disagree on the relationship between how students interact in 
discussions and whether or not the interactions are related to the 
course content, highlighting the need for further investigation. 
Content-related and non-content interactions refer to different 
genres of topics that play different roles in the learning process. 
Content-related interactions are directly related to the learning of 
the course material while non-content interactions may serve a 
highly diversified array of purposes (for example logistic or 
social) that can contribute to, but are generally more distal in their 
impact on learning. As shown in [6] these different ways of 
engaging may attract distinct collections of learners. Even when 
learners participate in both kinds of interactions, they may play 
different roles and show different participation patterns in the two 
contexts. Furthermore, from a theoretical perspective there is an 
expectation that participation in content-related interactions and 
social networks would be more predictive of learning outcomes 
than participation in non-content interactions. Thus for both 
conceptual and empirical reasons, it makes sense to analyze the 
social networks formed based on these activities separately. 

2.3 Defining Social Ties  
As noted previously SNA studies of MOOCs have used varying 
definitions to construct social ties. For example, the studies cited 
in this paper thusfar have used copresence and (directed or 
undirected) direct reply to construct ties. Tie definition is critical 
for SNA studies because different ways of establishing ties carry 
different assumptions about the nature of the interaction in social 
networks that have implications for network outcomes and their 
interpretation. This issue, however, has not been well addressed in 
the literature. The majority of studies simply establish their tie 
definition without giving any explanation or rationale. 
Two types of social networks have been commonly constructed 
using the reply structure of threaded discussions in discussion 
forums that adopt multi-level post structure. The first type is the 
network of speaking interaction. In this type of network, a tie is 
defined as “speaking to” someone. This type of network formation 
mechanism is based strictly on the reply relationship in the 
forums. One approach that adopts this mechanism is direct reply 
relationship, in which a tie is constructed only if there is a direct 
reply relationship between two nodes in the same thread, either 
between the thread starter and a reply post addressed to it, or 
between a reply post and its further reply, which is commonly 
seen in discussion forums that support multiple levels of posts. 
Direct Reply only maps the speaking interaction between users, 



without making any assumption about others who may have been 
informed by the post but not replied to it directly. This is perhaps 
the most straightforward approach to tie formation in online 
discussions and is used by many studies [e.g. 14; 15]. However, 
an important problem with this scheme is there is no guarantee 
that when making a post, forum users always choose the 
appropriate location and level. In addition, some discussion 
forums may only support limited levels of posts. For instance, 
discussion forums on the Coursera platform only support three 
levels of posts. When a response is made to a level 3 post, it is 
displayed as another level 3 post. How accurately the reply 
structure produced in such forums reflects the actual relations 
among learners is questionable. As the Direct Reply tie definition 
extracts social ties strictly according to the logged reply structure, 
it is most vulnerable to such problems.  
To work around such concerns, [30] proposed the Star tie 
definition for network extraction when investigating relationships 
between course engagement, performance and social connectivity. 
Star also defines a tie as “speaking to” someone; but different than 
Direct Reply which distinguishes multiple levels of posts and map 
ties as direct contact between nodes on different levels, Star 
considers all posts in the same thread being tied only to the thread 
starter. The rational is even if a reply post was not addressed 
directly to the starter, it was made in the context of the thread and 
should address the topic set by it, thus the tie is considered a 
traceable contact within the scope of a thread. Star structure 
highlights the importance of thread starter; however, as it does not 
distinguish between different levels of replies, it overlooks 
connections formed between learners within the same thread.    
A hybrid scheme that combines Direct Reply and Star was 
introduced by [9] in their investigation of social structure in online 
discussion forums using natural language processing and SNA 
methods. This scheme also makes use of traceable reply 
relationships to map ties. Ties are constructed both between posts 
on different levels and between each post and the thread starter. 
This scheme produces a more comprehensive network than the 
first two schemes alone, but still only considered the act of 
speaking in a threaded discussion. As a learner could access 
multiple posts made by people interested in the same topic, social 
relationships could thus form among them through “listening to” 
each other. Therefore, the methods that strictly follow the 
speaking contacts could leave out the interactions and 
relationships between learners who never speak to each other 
directly but have spoken on the same topic in the same thread.  
A different approach that addresses this issue is to create a 
copresence network that embodies coparticipation relationships 
among nodes. In a copresence network, a tie is defined as “being 
present” in the same part of a discussion. Two nodes can have a 
tie as long as they are in the same thread or subthread, without the 
need to have directly replied to each other. Thus ties are formed 
both hierarchically between child-parent nodes and horizontally 
between two nodes on the same level in the reply structure. This 
type of network formation mechanism represents the notion of 
online discussions as collective conversations rather than single 
streams of individual replies. Within the genre of copresence 
networks, the usual scheme is total copresence where any two 
nodes in the same thread are considered having a tie [9]. 
However, when this scheme is used to map interaction, the size of 
threads can be problematic. It might be reasonable to assume that 
a participant in a thread with a small number of replies has ties 
with all others in the same thread through reading their posts, but 
this assumption becomes less reasonable when the number of 

replies is very large. To address this problem, another scheme is 
to set a cap on the reasonable number of posts in the same thread 
(or subthread) that a participant would read and use this to create a 
measure of limited copresence. It is also possible to assign 
deceased weight to ties in large threads.  The five tie definitions 
are summarized in Figure 1.  

 
Figure 1. Tie definitions on a continuum 

3. STUDY FRAMING 
In this study, we examine the effects of partitioning a MOOC 
forum social network according to whether or not the discussion 
interactions are related to the course content. This can bring many 
benefits. First, examining the two networks separately can provide 
understanding of network properties and formation mechanisms 
for different kinds of interactions and allows for more accurate 
attribution of factors that influence such processes. Second, it can 
reveal the characteristics of participants in the two networks and 
help to identify learner subpopulations so as to allow for a more 
specialized understanding of different learning needs. Third, it 
may allow for more nuanced prediction of learning outcomes. 
Finally, as content-related MOOC forum activities share many 
characteristics with conventional online learning forums, this 
approach allows for more aligned comparisons with previous 
online discussion SNA research findings. In addition, we use five 
tie formation definitions to investigate their impact on the 
consequent networks extracted. To allow for parallel comparisons 
across tie definitions, this phase of the work examines only 
undirected networks. 
RQ1: What effects do different tie formation mechanisms have on 
the resulting network characteristics and interpretation? 
RQ2: In what ways do social networks extracted from content-
related and non-content activities show distinct characteristics 
from each other and the unpartitioned network? 

4. METHODS 
4.1 Data Source  
This study used data from StatMed’14, a completed MOOC 
offered in 2014 on Stanford open-source platform Lagunita. The 
course is an introductory course on probability and statistics with 
a special focus on statistics in medical studies. The course 
provided a discussion forum for interaction in nine topic areas, 
including General, Video, Homework, Course Material Feedback, 
External Resources, Tech Support, Introductions, Study Group, 
and Platform Feedback. Learners were invited to post questions 
and comments for response by peers, the TA and the instructor. 
Forum information provided in the dataset included the following: 
thread id; post id; user id; post position in thread (thread starting 
post, reply post, or reply-to-reply post); parent post; post text; post 
creation date and time; and number of votes post received. Thread 
titles were not included. The discussion forum was participated by 
568 unique users. They made 817 thread starting posts, 1277 reply 
posts, and 1035 reply-to-reply posts in the forums. Of the 817 
threads, 117 received no reply. Five reply posts that contained 
non-English language or only punctuation were removed, leaving 
a total corpus of 817 threads with 2307 replies made by 567 users. 



4.2 Thread Classification 
The 817 threads were classified as either being content-related or 
non-content using a unigram and bigram based-model built on 
manually-coded starting posts from a prior offering of the course 
[28]. In previous work, the model demonstrated good reliability 
on StatMed’14 data for both thread starting and reply posts 
(accuracy > .81) [27; 28]. This model was used in conjunction 
with dynamic interrelated post and thread categorization DIPTiC 
[5] to categorize threads by comparing the model classification of 
thread starting post and distribution of replies. This additional step 
increased the estimation of classification accuracy to .88 [5]. 
Using this comprehensive characterization method, a total of 468 
threads containing 1446 replies were labeled as content-related 
and a total of 349 threads containing 861 replies were labeled as 
non-content. 

4.3 Network Construction 
4.3.1 Network Participants 
The nodelist was extracted from discussion forum data using user 
id of posts. It was found that of the 567 forum users extracted 
from the cleaned data, 178 participated only in content-related 
threads, 232 participated only in non-content threads, and 157 
participated in both kinds of threads. Thus the number of nodes 
for the unpartitioned network, content-related network, and non-
content networks were 567, 335, and 389 respectively. 

4.3.2 Tie Extraction 
Edgelists were extracted using five tie definitions. 
Direct Reply: The author of each post is connected with the 
author of its parent post; this represents the actual reply structure 
(see Figure 2a). Using this definition, a total of 2307 ties were 
extracted from the unpartitioned network; after removing 286 self-
loops, 2021 ties representing 1086 unique edges remained, 
including 1249 content-related ties representing 625 unique edges 
and 772 non-content ties representing 551 unique edges.  
Star: The author of each reply and reply-to-reply post is 
connected with the author of the thread starting post (see Figure 
2b). Using this definition, a total of 2307 ties were extracted from 
the unpartitioned network; after removing 502 self-loops, 1805 
ties representing 1116 unique edges remained, including 1092 
content-related ties representing 625 unique edges and 713 non-
content ties representing 558 unique edges. 
Direct Reply + Star: Ties defined in both Direct Reply and Star 
were included but the same tie was never counted more than one 
time (see Figure 2c). Using this definition, a total of 3339 ties 
were extracted from the unpartitioned network; after removing 
683 self-loops, 2656 ties representing 1292 unique edges 
remained, including 1697 content-related ties representing 747 
unique edges and 959 non-content ties representing 643 unique 
edges.  
Total Copresence: All authors in the same thread are connected 
with each other (see Figure 2d). Using a VBA script written for 
this definition, a total of 15299 ties were extracted from the 
unpartitioned network; after removing 1992 self-loops, 13307 ties 
representing 5578 unique edges remained, including 7018 
content-related ties representing 1133 unique edges and 6289 non-
content ties representing 4641 unique edges.  
Limited Copresence: All users in small threads (<5 replies) are 
connected to each other; in larger threads users are connected to 
all other users in their sub-thread and the thread starter only (see 
Figure 2e). Of all 489 subthreads in larger threads, only 69 (14%) 
have more than four posts. Using a VBA script written for this 

definition, a total of 5313 edges were extracted from the 
unpartitioned network; after removing 1066 self-loops, 4247 ties 
representing 1456 unique edges remained, including 2879 
content-related ties representing 848 unique edges and 1368 non-
content ties representing 724 unique edges.  

 
Figure 2. Ties based on five definitions  

4.3.3 Network Construction and Visualization  
To investigate the influence of tie definitions on the 
characteristics of the resultant networks, as well as to investigate 
the characteristics of social networks formed in content-related 
and non-content activities, three undirected networks 
(unpartitioned, content-related, and non-content) were constructed 
based on each of the five definitions. Gephi 0.9.1. for mac was 
used to compute network measures and visualize the networks 
employing the Force Atlas layout algorithm.  

5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
5.1 Networks Formed by Five Tie Definitions 
The characteristics of the fifteen networks revealed several 
findings about the impact of tie definition. First, reply structure-
based tie definitions (Direct Reply, Star, and Direct Reply+Star) 
produced networks with similar structures and network measures 
(see Figure 3a - c and Table 1). Although Limited Copresence 
extracts network based on coparticipation, the resulted networks 
are similar to those produced using reply-structure-based 
definitions, especially Direct Reply+Star (see Figure 3d and Table 
1). It is worth investigating to what extent this is dependent on the 
technical limitations of the MOOC to three levels of threading as 
well as the actual patterns of post distribution in this particular 
data set. This might usefully be done with synthetically generated 
data. It would also be interesting to examine how different limits 
for the maximum number of presumably shared posts in a thread 
impacts the structure of Limited Copresence networks.  

Table 1. Network measures of five unpartitioned networks 

 DR S DR+S LC TC 
# of edges 1086 1116 1292 1456 5578 
Avg node 

degree (SD) 
3.83 

(14.54) 
3.94 

(12.92) 
4.56 

(15.48) 
5.14 

(16.69) 
19.68 

(36.63) 
Avg edge 

weight (SD) 
1.86 

(3.38) 
1.62 

(2.50) 
2.06 

(4.36) 
2.92 

(9.49) 
2.39 

(14.98) 

DR = Direct Reply S = Star  DR+S = Direct Reply+Star LC = 
Limited Copresence TC = Total Copresence 

Second, Total Copresence appeared to produce dramatically 
distinct networks than other tie definitions. For instance, the other 
four unpartitioned networks all have three major modules, each 
dominated by a single node of high centrality (see Figure 3a1, b1, 
c1, d1) and the two largest modules containing u1 and u417 are  





Only the primary components are shown in this figure. Node size represents degree. Color indicates module. 
Figure 3. Social networks constructed using five definitions

relatively more connected with each other than with the module 
containing u2. Such structure indicates interactions in these 
networks revolve around these three focal nodes with participants 
in the modules containing u1 and u417 tending to interact more 
with each other than with participants in the module containing 
u2. In contrast the Total Copresence network shows a very 
different picture (see Figure 3e1): one module contains the 
dominant central nodes of u1 and u417, while the second module 
has blown up into a balloon of many similar-degree 
interconnected nodes. 
An examination of the posts made by u1, u2, and u417 revealed 
both u1 and u417 were part of the instructional team who 
responded to and received responses from a large number of 
learners across multiple threads. This explains their prominence 
across networks made with each of the five tie definitions. In 
contrast, u2 was a learner who started a single socializing thread 
at the beginning of the course which received 82 replies and 10 
replies to replies. Although u2 only made this single post, as a 
thread starter he/she gained high degree in Direct Reply, Star, and 

Direct Reply+Star networks. Moreover, as this thread had mostly 
top-level replies, Limited Copresence resulted in very similar 
results to the reply-based networks. In Total Copresence networks 
however, all nodes in this giant thread have the same degree 
contribution from the thread, reducing the central role of u2 as the 
thread starter. This result suggests that the Total Copresence tie 
definition presents dangers for general use due to the 
disproportionate influence of large threads; however can be useful 
for detecting users with inflated social status due to 
“superthreads” initiation.   

5.2 Content vs Non-Content Networks 
5.2.1 Network and Module Levels 
A comparison of networks built using all five definitions revealed 
content-related and non-content networks to have distinct 
characteristics. First, the difference is revealed by their network 
measures. Using the Limited Copresence tie definition, the 
content-related network had an average node degree of 5.06 
compared to 3.72 in the non-content network; similarly, the 



average edge weight in the content-related network was 3.40, 
compared to 1.89 for the non-content network. 
These differences suggest users in the content-related network 
both interacted with more people and had more repeated 
interactions with the same people than those in non-content 
network. Moreover, the major modules in the two networks show 
different patterns (see Figure 3d2 and d3). The content-related 
network contains two closely interconnected modules with u1 and 
u417 as hubs. In the non-content network, all three major modules 
have less interconnections between them, especially the module 
containing u2, which is less tightly connected to the ones 
containing u1 and u417. This suggests there were more 
interactions between members of different modules in the content-
related network than in the non-content one.  
Another important finding at network level across all five tie 
definitions was that the unpartitioned network highly resembled 
the non-content network in several ways, such as the number of 
major modules, the relations between the modules, as well as the 
dominant participants. While this may be the result of specific 
features of content-related and non-content interactions in this 
data set, it illustrates well the danger that without partitioning, 
non-content interactions may mask or distort important content-
related connection in the network analysis. 

5.2.2 Individual Level: Learners 
To examine content-related and non-content networks at 
individual level, the top 10 learners ranked by degree centrality in 
unpartitioned, content-related, and non-content networks built 
through Limited Copresence were identified and both their 
properties in the network and actual discussion forum posts were 
examined (see Table 2).  
Table 2. Top 10 learners ranked by degree centrality in three 

networks (Limited Copresence)  

 
First, except for u2 and u30 who only participated in non-content 
network, other top learners all participated to some extent in both 
networks. However, for the 15 remaining distinct learners on the 
lists, only u10, u216, u21 appear on the high degree lists for both 
content-related and non-content networks while the rest of the top 
ranked learners have high degree in one network but not both. 
This indicates the top players in the two networks are largely 
different people. Learners who are highly connected in the 
content-related network are not necessarily highly connected in 
non-content network, and vice versa. The overall list thus 
represents a combination of two very different kinds of top users.  

5.2.3 Individual Level: Instructors 
To investigate instructors’ roles in discussing the course content, 
the modules that contained instructional team members u1 (169 
nodes) and u417 (88 nodes) in the content-related network based 
on Limited Copresence were compared (see Figure 4).  

Several similarities and differences between the two modules 
were noted. First, in both modules, a large proportion of learners 
are connected only to the instructor and not to any peers in the  

 
Figure 4. Instructor modules in content-related network 

(Limited Copresence)  
module, indicating that although peer interaction is considered a 
potential source of learning support in MOOCs [16], instructor-
learner interaction can often eclipse this and is still the primary 
form of interaction for many learners. Second, an important 
difference between the two modules is that there are more 
interconnections among learners in Instructor Module 1 while 
Instructor Module 2 is largely hub-and-spoke shaped: the average 
degree (excluding the central node) in Instructor Module 1 is 2.91 
compared to 1.93 for Instructor Module 2. These characteristics 
indicate that learners in Instructor Module 1 had more learner-
learner interactions than those in Instructor Module 2. To explore 
potential instructor influence that may partly account for the 
differences in learner-learner connections, the two instructors’ 
posts in all content-related threads were examined, revealing two 
distinct characteristics of instructors’ forum activities.  
First, the two instructors had distinct posting patterns. Instructor 
u1 made 353 posts in 240 content-related threads, including 216 
reply posts to thread starting posts, and 137 reply posts to 
subthread starting posts or other posts in subthreads. This diverse 
posting pattern indicates the instructor not only revisited the 
threads that he/she has participated in, but commented on other 
learners’ replies to learner-initiated threads. In contrast, instructor 
u417 made 121 replies to 119 content-related thread starting posts 
and never made any replies to subthreads. This indicates that this 
instructor only addressed the subset of all students that initiated 
threads (and not learners who participated only as responders). It 
is also notable that neither instructor initiated any content-related 
threads. While thread-starting can lead to centrality in a network, 
these instructors achieved the same effect simply through the 
volume of their replies and the attention they attracted. 
Second, the instructors appeared to use distinct intervention and 
social techniques in posting. In many cases, instructor u1 used 
diverse techniques that seemed intended to inspire and help 
learners to work out the answer or solution to a question 
themselves (e.g. “Looks like you are making great progress!...You 
are correct about dealing with categorical data, and the 
observations are certainly correlated!  Think about it again using 
the hint and let me know if you have any other questions?”). 
These techniques may have not only invited the original poster to 
post again, but also encouraged other learners to participate and 
form a tie with the original poster. U1 also used a variety of social 
presence indicators such as greetings and social presence in their 
messages. In contrast, instructor u417 usually provided 
straightforward answers or instructions to learners’ questions and 
seldom used social techniques. Future research can probe in depth 
the ways in which instructors’ different approaches to reply and 



social techniques may be associated with and influence learner-
learner interaction in MOOC discussions.  

6. IMPLICATIONS  
The complexity of interactions in MOOC discussion forum 
challenges the research community to come up with suitable 
methods to understand learning and teaching. In this study, we 
investigated characteristics of social networks partitioned based 
on content-relatedness and found that the content-related social 
network has distinct characteristics compare to the non-content 
network. An important value of this partitioning method is that it 
is not affected by variations in sub-forum structures, thus allowing 
for cross course and platform comparisons. Moreover, we 
investigated the effect of different tie definitions on network 
characteristics and interpretation. We found Total Copresence 
produces social networks with distinct characteristics and is useful 
for detecting inflated degree due to “superthreads”. These findings 
have important research and pedagogical implications for MOOC 
and large-scale online learning in general. 
First, our work indicates that network analysis method should take 
into account the nature of MOOC discussion forums and partition 
social networks based on pedagogical purpose. Given the 
complexity of activities and users, unpartitioned MOOC networks 
may be too comprehensive to be useful for specific research 
purposes, such as identifying competent learners [13] and 
investigating correlations between social properties and learning 
outcome [12; 14]. For instance, in the discussion forum we 
studied, 41% of forum participants in the unpartitioned network 
never participated in any content-related interaction. Including 
them into the network when analyzing learning-related social 
connections may result in distorted network properties. Moreover, 
as revealed by our study, the unpartitioned network can be 
strongly influenced by the non-content network, thus obscuring 
the characteristics of the content-related network. This means 
analyzing the unpartitioned network can lead to overlooking the 
characteristics of learning-related interactions. To make sure that 
content-partitioned networks accurately represent the intended 
division and are comparable across studies, it is critical to use a 
valid and generalizable partition method. The endogenous 
content/non-content partitioning used here appears superior to 
exogenous partitioning based on sub-forums both because it 
circumvents the problem of cross-posting across sub-forums [22] 
and because it allows for comparisons across courses using 
different sub-forum divisions. 
Second, our research also improved understanding of the 
assumptions and implications of different network tie definitions. 
While the Direct Reply, Star, Direct Reply+Star, and Limited 
Copresence definitions produced similar networks, the Total 
Copresence networks revealed a disproportionate influence of 
large threads. This leads us to caution the interpretation of 
networks created with this tie definition and disfavor its use. We 
believe this is an important contribution for SNA work in MOOCs 
moving forward due to common presence of large threads in 
MOOC discussions (and previously prevalent use of this tie 
definition [e.g. 7, 8, 12, 20]). It is worthwhile to note, however, 
that networks based on Total Copresence ties can be useful as a 
diagnostic for detecting inflated social status due to “superthreads.” 
Finally, this research also has important pedagogical implications. 
First, instructors can identify competent and influential learners in 
content-related network who are suitable candidates for 
community TA or help giver roles. Second, they could identify 
disconnected or marginalized users who require additional 
assistance. Third, instructors could identify learners that only 

participate in non-content networks and invite them to take part in 
learning-related interactions. Fourth, learners’ network statuses 
could also also be provided to them directly to help them make 
sense of their learning behaviors. Showing learners the extent to 
which they are a central or peripheral part of a connected structure 
in a content-related network and how their status may be related 
to their learning could help them adjust their participation patterns 
for better learning outcomes. Finally, instructors could be 
presented with the association between their participation patterns 
and the patterns in learner-learner interactions in content-related 
network to help them make informed participation decision and 
adjust their facilitation techniques.  
The goal of this study was to investigate the basic importance and 
usefulness of distinguishing different tie definitions and 
partitioning social networks based on content-relatedness. As only 
a single dataset was used, we would not expect the specific 
findings from this study to generalize to other MOOC forum data. 
However, the importance of purposefully selecting an appropriate 
tie definition and examining content/non-content distinctions was 
established. Future work can move forward to examine cross 
course similarities and differences as well as patterns in the 
growth and evolution of networks over time.  

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Stanford University and the MOOCPosts Dataset team 
for their assistance in accessing and working with the data. 

8. REFERENCES 
[1] Agrawal, A., Venkatraman, J., Leonard, S., and Paepcke, A. 

2015. YouEDU: addressing confusion in MOOC discussion 
forums by recommending instructional video clips. In 
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 
Education Data Mining (Madrid, Spain, June 26 - 29, 2015). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 297-304.  

[2] Breslow, L., Pritchard, D. E., DeBoer, J., Stump, G. S., Ho, 
A. D., and Seaton, D. T. 2013. Studying learning in the 
worldwide classroom research into edX's first MOOC. 
Research & Practice In Assessment, 8, 13-25.  

[3] Cho, H., Gay, G., Davidson, B., and Ingraffea, A. 2007. 
Social networks, communication styles, and learning 
performance in a CSCL community. Computers and 
Education, 49, 2, 309-329.  

[4] Cui, Y., and Wise, A. F. 2015. Identifying content-related 
threads in MOOC discussion forums. In Proceedings of the 
2nd ACM Conference on Learning @ scale (Vancouver, 
Canada, March 14-18, 2015). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
299-303. DOI= 10.1145/2724660.2728679.  

[5] Cui, Y., Wise, A. F., and Jin, W.Q. (in review). Humans and 
machines together: Improving characterization of large scale 
online discussions through dynamic interrelated post and 
thread categorization (DIPTiC). 

[6] Dowell, N., Skrypnyk, O., Joksimovi?, S., Graesser, A. C., 
Dawson, S., Gaševi?, D., Vries, P. d., Hennis, T., and 
Kovanovi?, V. 2015. Modeling learners’ social centrality and 
performance through language and discourse. In Proceedings 
of the 8th International Conference on Educational Data 
Mining (Madrid, Spain, June 26-29, 2015). ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 250-257. 

[7] Gillani, N., and Eynon, R. 2014. Communication patterns in 
massively open online courses. The Internet and Higher 
Education, 23, 18-26. 



[8] Gillani, N., Yasseri, T., Eynon, R., and Hjorth, I. 2014. 
Structural limitations of learning in a crowd: communication 
vulnerability and information diffusion in MOOCs. Nature 
Scientific Reports, 4. DOI= 10.1038/srep06447. 

[9] Gruzd, A.A., and Haythornthwaite, C. 2008. Automated 
discovery and analysis of social networks from threaded 
discussions. In Proceedings of the International Network of 
Social Network Analysts 2008, St. Pete Beach (St. Pete 
Beach, USA.2008). Retrieved Sep 28, 2016:   
http://hdl.handle.net/10150/105081. 

[10] Hecking, T., Chounta, I. A., and Hoppe, H. U. 2016. 
Investigating social and semantic user roles in MOOC 
discussion forums. In Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge 
(Edinburgh, UK, April 25-29, 2016) ACM New York, NY, 
USA, 198-207. DOI= 10.1145/2883851.2883924. 

[11] Hew, K.F., and Cheung, W.S. 2014. Students’ and 
instructors’ use of massive open online courses (MOOCs): 
motivations and challenges. Educational Research Review, 
12, 45-58. DOI= 10.1016/j.edurev.2014.05.001 

[12] Jiang, S., Fitzhugh, S. M., and Warschauer, M. 2014. Social 
positioning and performance in MOOCs. In Proceedings of 
Graph-Based Educational Data Mining Workshop at the 7th 
International Conference on Educational Data Mining 
(London, United Kingdom, 2014). CEUR-WS, 55-58.  

[13] Jiang, Z., Zhang, Y., Liu, C., and Li, X. 2015. Influence 
analysis by heterogeneous network in MOOC forums: what 
can we discover? In Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Education Data Mining (Madrid, Spain, June 
26 - 29, 2015). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 242-249.  

[14] Joksimovi?, S., Manataki, A., Gaševi?, D., Dawson, S., 
Kovanovi?, V., & De Kereki, I. F. 2016. Translating network 
position into performance: importance of centrality in 
different network configurations. In Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Learning Analytics & 
Knowledge (Edinburgh, UK, April 25-29, 2016) ACM New 
York, NY, USA, 314-323. DOI= 10.1145/2883851.2883928. 

[15] Kellogg, S., Booth, S., and Oliver, K. 2014. A social network 
perspective on peer supported learning in MOOCs for 
educators. The International Review of Research in Open 
and Distributed Learning, 15, 5. DOI= 
10.19173/irrodl.v15i5.1852. 

[16] Khalil, H., and Ebner, M. 2013. “How satisfied are you with 
your MOOC?” - a research study on interaction in huge 
online courses. In Proceedings of EdMedia 2013 (Victoria, 
Canada, June 24, 2013). AACE, 830-839.  

[17] Kizilcec, R. F., Piech, C., and Schneider, E. 2013. 
Deconstructing disengagement: analyzing learner 
subpopulations in massive open online courses. In 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on 
Learning Analytics and Knowledge (Leuven, Belgium, April 
8 - 12, 2013). ACM New York, NY, USA, 170-179. DOI= 
0.1145/2460296.2460330. 

[18] Kuh, G. 2002. From promise to progress: how colleges and 
universities are using student engagement results to improve 
collegiate quality. National Survey of Student Engagement 
Annual Report. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University. 

[19] McGuire, R. 2013. Building a sense of community in 
MOOCs. Campus Technology, 26, 12, 31-33.  

[20] Poquet, L., and Dawson, S. 2016. Untangling MOOC learner 
networks. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference 
on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (Edinburgh, UK, 
April 25-29, 2016) ACM New York, NY, USA, 208-212. 
DOI= 10.1145/2883851.2883919. 

[21] Rosé, C. P., and Ferschke, O. 2016. Technology support for 
discussion based learning: from computer supported 
collaborative learning to the future of Massive Open Online 
Courses. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in 
Education, 26, 2, 660-678. 

[22] Rossi, L.A., and Gnawali, O. 2014. Language independent 
analysis and classification of discussion threads in Coursera 
MOOC forums. In Proceedings of 2014 IEEE 15th 
International Conference on Information Reuse and 
Integration (San Francisco, USA, August 13 - 14, 2014). 
IEEE, 654-661. DOI= 10.1109/IRI.2014.7051952.  

[23] Santos, J.L., Klerkx, J., Duval, E., Gago, D., and Rodríguez, 
L. 2014. Success, activity and drop-outs in MOOCs: an 
exploratory study on the UNED COMA courses. In 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Learning 
Analytics and Knowledge (Indianapolis, USA, March 24 - 
28, 2014). ACM New York, NY, USA, 98-102. DOI= 
10.1145/2567574.2567627. 

[24] Stump, G. S., DeBoer, J., Whittinghill, J., and Breslow, L. 
2013. Development of a framework to classify MOOC 
discussion forum posts: methodology and challenges. In 
Proceedings of NIPS 2013 Workshop on Data Driven 
Education (Lake Tahoe, United States, December 5 - 8, 
2013). NIPS Foundation, 1-20.  

[25] Trentin, G. 2000. The quality-interactivity relationship in 
distance education. Educational Technology, 40, 1, 17-27.  

[26] Wise, A. F., Chang, J., Duffy, T. M., and del Valle, R. 2004. 
The effects of teacher social presence on student satisfaction, 
engagement, and learning. Journal of Educational 
Computing Research, 31, 3, 247-271. 

[27] Wise, A. F., Cui, Y., Jin, W., and Vytasek, J. 2017. Mining 
for gold: identifying content-related MOOC discussion 
threads across domains through linguistic modeling. The 
Internet and Higher Education, 32, 11-28.  

[28] Wise, A. F., Cui, Y., and Vytasek, J. 2016. Bringing order to 
chaos in MOOC discussion forums with content-related 
thread identification. In Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge 
(Edinburgh, UK, April 25-29, 2016) ACM New York, NY, 
USA, 188-197. DOI= 10.1145/2883851.2883916.  

[29] Yusof, N., and Rahman, A. A. 2009. Students' interactions in 
online asynchronous discussion forum: a social network 
analysis. In Proceedings of 2009 International Conference 
on Education Technology and Computer (Singapore, 
Singapore, Apr 17 – 20, 2009). IEEE, 25-29. 

[30] Zhu, M., Bergner, Y., Zhang, Y., Baker, R., Wang, Y., and 
Paquette, L. 2016. Longitudinal engagement, performance, 
and social connectivity: a MOOC case study using 
exponential random graph models. In Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge (Edinburgh, UK, April 25-29, 2016). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 223-230. DOI= 10.1145/288385. 



