
Data literacy for Learning Analytics 
Annika Wolff, John Moore 

Computing and Communications, Faculty of Maths, 
Computing and Technology  

The Open University Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK  
{annika.wolff, john.moore}@open.ac.uk  

 Zdenek Zdrahal, Martin Hlosta, Jakub Kuzilek 
Knowledge Media Institute 

The Open University Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK  
{zdenek.zdrahal, martin.hlosta, 

jakub.kuzilek}@open.ac.uk  
 

 
ABSTRACT 
This workshop explores how data literacy impacts on learning 
analytics both for practitioners and for end users. The term data 
literacy is used to broadly describe the set of abilities around the 
use of data as part of everyday thinking and reasoning for solving 
real-world problems. It is a skill required both by learning 
analytics practitioners to derive actionable insights from data and 
by the intended end users, such that it affects their ability to 
accurately interpret and critique presented analysis of data. The 
latter is particularly important, since learning analytics outcomes 
can be targeted at a wide range of end users, some of whom will 
be young students and many of whom are not data specialists. 
Whilst data literacy is rarely an end goal of learning analytics 
projects, this workshop aims to find where issues related to data 
literacy have impacted on project outcomes and where important 
insights have been gained. This workshop will further encourage 
the sharing of knowledge and experience through practical 
activities with datasets and visualisations. This workshop aims to 
highlight the need for a greater understanding of data literacy as a 
field of study, especially with regard to communicating around 
large, complex, data sets.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
J.1 [Administrative Data Processing] Education; K.3.1 [Computer 
Uses in Education] Computer-assisted instruction (CAI)  

General Terms 
Measurement, Design, Human Factors 

Keywords 
Learning analytics, data literacy, communication, analysis, 
visualization 

1. Motivation 
Data analytics are coming out of the lab and into the mainstream. 
As more of the general population start interacting with complex 
data sets it is time to start taking data literacy seriously.  
This is of particular importance within the field of learning 
analytics, where the results of data analysis are targeted towards a 
multitude of different end users, from young students, teachers, 
faculty and administration. Learning analytics aims to provide 
actionable insights to educators and learners on different aspects 
of learning. Whilst the remit of learning analytics can be quite 
broad, in each case there must be a communication of the data 
analysis through which the important insights can be easily 
understood by the target audience. Both the people producing the 
data analysis and the people on the receiving end must have a 
foundational level of data literacy in order to be able to 
communicate effectively via the data. 
But how can this be defined? What are the specific competences 
of the different stakeholders and how, within the field of learning 
analytics, is it possible to support their acquisition or to develop 
an understanding such that it is possible to develop dashboards 
and visualisations of data that are easily understood by the target 
audience? 
In early stages of the field of learning analytics a lot of focus has 
been on the types of data available and the types of analysis that 
can be applied to it. This workshop explores the issues around 
data literacy for learning analytics and asks the question do 
students and educators need a certain level of data literacy to 
understand the outputs of learning analytics? And crucially, do 
most students and educators achieve this level?  

2. Workshop Objectives And Topics 
The objective of the workshop is to develop a broader 
understanding of data literacy, particularly with respect to 
different aspects of learning analytics. The workshop aims to 
develop this as a field of study in its own right within the learning 
analytics community and to make it a more prominent 
consideration when designing LA systems. 
Topics of interest include, but are not limited to: 

• Creating dashboards and visualisations for non-data 
experts 

• Making data and algorithms visible as a way to improve 
collected data and improve peoples data-contributing 
behaviour 

• Does increasing visibility of algorithms change learner 
behaviour? 

• Gaming the learning analytics – do data literate learners 
start to play the system? 

• Visualizing analytic processes for novice users. 
 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other 
uses, contact the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883864 



The workshop website can be found at: 
http://events.kmi.open.ac.uk/dataliteracy4la/ 
 

3. Target Group 
The target group are primarily member of the LA community who 
need to communicate outputs of data analysis, who are interested 
to understand how data literacy aligns with the process of 
conducting analysis of learner data, or who wants to understand 
how data literacy might affect the behavior of various LA 
stakeholders.   

4. Format 
The workshop is intended to bring participants together for one 
day.  We want to make the workshop as interactive as possible. In 
the morning we will have some short presentations based on 
submitted papers, but with a focus very much on speakers 
presenting information directly related to data literacy angles of 
projects. In the afternoon participants will work in groups on one 
of three practical tasks (depending on participant numbers, there 
may be several groups working on the same type of task). Tasks 
are focused on understanding how data literacy can impact on 
communicating outputs of learning analytics, from different 
starting points. There will be flexibility on the day to allow for 
additional topics of interest to be explored if there is a big enough 
group and appropriate resource for it. Proposed tasks are:  

1. Analyzing and visualizing learner data. Participants 
will be provided, in advance of the workshop and via 
the workshop website, an extract of learner data and 
some suggested analyses aimed to get participants to 
focus on important aspects of the data. This will be from 
the anonymised Open University Learning Analytics 
dataset (https://analyse.kmi.open.ac.uk/open_dataset) 
which contains data about courses, students and their 
interactions with Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) 
for seven selected courses. This data will have been 
already used within a mashup event 
(https://www.participant.co.uk/open_data_mashup_day) 
and insights from this experience will be used to inform 
the running of this session. During the workshop, 
participants will work together to analyse and produce 
insight from a more extensive version of this dataset, 
which they will then try to convey to other workshop 
participants. It will be suggested they bring their own 
devices and preferred tools for data analysis and 
visualization, although we will also create a list of 
useful free and easily downloadable tools. Prior to the 
workshop we will also use the workshop website to 
solicit for additional datasets from workshop attendees. 
We would intend that at least some participants of this 
group would be proficient in data analysis and 
visualization, however we would aim to mix the group 

to also include non data experts. Participants might 
choose to visualize data towards individuals, about 
groups of students, or to combine the two. The types of 
insights we might expect from this group would be a 
developing understanding of how choices of analysis 
impact on the types of visualisations and 
communications that are available from data.  Data 
analysis experts may be prompted to reflect more 
carefully on how they choose to communicate the 
outcome of their analyses with respect to the assumed 
competences of their target audience.  

2. Communicating from aggregated data. Participants in 
this group will be provided with a pre-digested output 
from the Open Universities (OU) own analytics work on 
a) predicting learner failure from interactions in the 
VLE b) providing student focused recommendations. 
The output will be derived from the OU’s existing 
visualisations af data analyses, yet will be presented in a 
non visual way. Participants will be asked to identify 
ways to communicate this data to different types of user, 
including expert and non experts, or faculty, tutors, or 
students. They will present their outputs to other groups 
to assess how successful they are in conveying the 
intended message. Outputs could be created by 
technology or drawn onto paper as a creative design, or 
constructed in 3D. Participants are invited to be 
particularly creative in this session. The types of 
insights we might expect from this group would be 
around how to communicate to different audiences from 
complex datasets and the creation of potentially new 
modes of visualizing learner data. We hope to create a 
better understanding of how to visualize and 
communicate to students themselves the outcome of 
recommenders. 

3. Data and visualization clinic. In this group, 
participants share their experience of creating 
dashboards and visualisations for different types of 
users. Participants will be solicited to bring examples of 
visualisations they have used with end users as a point 
for discussion, to understand if the outputs are 
communicating effectively and to collectively explore 
better ways for visualizing, especially for non-expert 
audiences. The types of insight expected from this 
group are towards developing best practice for 
communicating about data, based on real life examples. 

Groups will share their insights amongst each other at the end of 
the day, insights will be captured and used to define more clearly 
what data literacy means in the field of learning analytics and 
what are the biggest problems to tackle. 
 

 



