
	  
	  

Investigating the Impact of a Notification System on 
Student Behaviors in a Discourse-Intensive  

Hybrid Course: A Case Study 
Zhenhua Xu 

University of Toronto 
252 Bloor St W, Toronto, ON M5S 1V6 

zhenh.xu@mail.utoronto.ca 
 

Alexandra Makos	  
University of Toronto 

252 Bloor St W, Toronto, ON M5S 1V6 
alexandra.makos@mail.utoronto.ca

ABSTRACT 
This study investigated the effects of students’ opting to use 
notification tools in a collaborative discourse-intensive online 
graduate course. Social constructivism and self-expectancy theory 
were applied to frame our understanding of the interactive 
relationship between the use of the notification tools, student’s 
online contribution behavior and student’s self-expectancy. Log-
data from a 12-week hybrid (online and face-to-face) graduate 
course at a Canadian faculty of education was analyzed. Findings 
from the correlation, mediation and ANOVA analyses suggested 
that activation of the notification tool system positively affected 
students’ contribution behavior and that the influence of the use of 
notification tools on student contribution behavior was partially 
mediated by student’s self-expectancy. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.3 [Group and Organization Interfaces]: Synchronous 
interaction, Web-based interaction 

General Terms 
Design, Human Factors, Theory 

Keywords 
Student Online Behavior, Self-expectancy, Notification System 
 

1. INTRODUCTION 
The design of online learning environments influences student 

behavior [2, 3]. To understand how the design influences 
behavior, we need to understand the types of tracked information 
and the ways information is presented to the learner [4]. A review 
of the literature finds little empirical evidence for the importance 
of using tracked information to guide learner’s self-regulated 
behavior because this type of information is typically only 
available to instructors or system administrators. This study was 
intended to fill the gap by exploring how the use of personalized 
notification tools increases user contribution behavior in a 
collaborative online learning environment, Pepper, where online 
discussions are a significant portion of students’ final grades.  

 

 
Through the lenses of social constructivism and self-expectancy 
theory, we examined the interactive relationship between 
students’ self-expectancy (in this study described as students’ 
perceived value for academic tasks and their prior professional 
experience with the tasks), the use of notification tools embedded 
within the online learning environment and their online 
contribution behavior. Based on Atkinson’s self-expectancy 
model [1] achievement behavior is predicted by value, that is, a 
student’s responses to the task. Responses would include those 
with goals, values and interests. According to Weiner [6], 
students’ prior experience with tasks is a useful predictor of 
academic performance. In this case study, we treated the use of 
notification tools as a type of strategy to guide learning and 
examined its relationship with self-expectancy. Specifically, we 
investigated the difference between its direct and indirect 
relationship with student contribution behavior. We hypothesized: 
1) that the use of the notification tools would be influenced by 
student’s self-expectancy; 2) that the use of the notification tools 
would cause a behavior change in students’ contributions in 
Pepper – students would be more likely to contribute to Pepper if 
they had the notification system activated; 3) that students’ self-
expectancy would influence their contribution behavior.  
 

2. SUMMARY OF DATA SOURCE 
Data were drawn from the log files of a hybrid graduate 

course using Pepper at a leading Canadian faculty of education. 
The primary artifact students generated in the environment was a 
note that can contain text, attachments, embedded videos and 
images, hyperlinks to the Internet, and links to other students’ 
notes within the environment. Student productivity metrics 
include the following: Notes-written, Notes-read, Private-
messages sent, replies made to peer notes, Replies-received from 
peers, Likes- given, Likes-received, Links-created to peers’ notes 
and Links- received to student notes. Pepper has six notification 
tools: 1) Replies to one of your notes, 2) sends you a private 
message, 3) posts a message to the class wall, 4) edits a note that 
is co-authored by you, 5) links to one of your notes and, 6) adds a 
new note to one of the various folders in the course community. 
Each notification was coded as a dichotomous variable. The 
number of notifications received for each tool was extracted and 
treated as a continuous variable. A total of 73 students enrolled in 
this 12-week course. Weekly online discussions were valued at 
50% of the students’ final grade. In this course, students were 
recommended to activate their notification system to keep them 
aware of online discussion activity. 80% of students activated 
notifications in the course.   

 

 
 
 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact 
the Owner/Author. 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '15, Mar 16-20, 2015, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA 
ACM 978-1-4503-3417-4/15/03. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723663 

 

402



	  
	  
3. SUMMARY OF PRELIMARY RESULTS  

Correlation analyses suggested the use of notification tools is 
significantly associated with students’ online contribution and 
their interactivity behaviors. Replies-received were significantly 
associated with the number of notes written, the number of 
messages written and the number of Likes-given. It suggests that 
students who received more replies from peers or instructors 
tended to write more notes (r = .88, p < .001) and more messages 
(r = .28, p < .05). They also tended to give more Likes to peers’ 
notes (r = .35, p < .05). The correlations between Likes-received, 
the number of note written and the number of Likes-given was 
significantly positive, which suggests receiving Likes motivates 
desirable discussion behavior. Students who received more Likes 
tend to write more notes (r = .71, p < .001) and give more Likes to 
others (r = .51, p < .001). In addition, students who wrote more 
notes tended to be linked more often by others (r = .43, p < .01). 
Students who created more links to others’ notes also tended to be 
linked more by their peers (r = .67, p < .001). Student’s perceived 
task value was positively correlated with Link-notification tool (r 
= .24, p < .05). That is, students who expected to expand their 
knowledge and to apply it to their professional practice tended to 
use the Link-notification tool more frequently. Students’ prior 
professional experience with the academic tasks was also 
significantly associated with the Link-notification tool (r = .23, p 
< .05).  

Further, mediation analysis indicated a mediated relationship 
among students’ self-expectancy, the use of notifications and 
student contribution behavior. Although, the results did not show 
a direct causal relationship between student self-expectancy and 
the use of notification tools, p > .05, given that the null hypothesis 
was violated (H0: ab ? 0), the coefficient value from 
unstandardized regression was significant from zero, (.33 ×.44) = 
.15, suggesting a significant indirect effect of self-expectancy on 
contribution behavior. To further test this indirect effect, 
bootstrapping procedures were conducted. Unstandardized, 
indirect effects were computed for each of 10,000 bootstrapped 
samples, and the 95% confidence interval was computed by 
determining the indirect effects at the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles. 
The bootstrapped unstandardized indirect effect was 1.46, and the 
95% confidence interval ranged from .21 to 1.28. Thus, the 
indirect effect was statistically significant, which suggested a 
mediated path exists. Following the significant mediated path, we 
saw a significant direct path from the used of the notification tools 
and student online contribution behavior, c? = 21.51, p = .02. 
Given that c? is significant and large, we could assume that the 
influence of the use of notification tools on student contribution 
behavior was partially mediated by student self-expectancy. 

Finally, we ran comparison tests to explore the difference in 
student online contribution behavior when they chose to use/not 
use a notification system. Results suggested student contribution 
behavior increased when the Response-notification tool was 
turned on (MON = 1291.34 vs. MOFF= 1182.53); similarly, there 
was an increase in contribution behavior when the Message-
notification tool was turned on (MON = 1278.11 vs. MOFF= 
1102.06). Further, when both the Co-author and Classwall-
notification tools were turned on, student contribution behavior 
tended to increase (MCoauthorON = 1352.78 vs. MCoauthorOFF = 
1218.09; MClasswallON = 1288.31 vs. MClasswallOFF = 1205.04). 
However, the use of the Link-notification tool did not make a 
difference in student contribution behavior (MLinkON = 1179.67 vs. 
MLinkOFF = 1245.52). In addition, results from ANOVA analysis 
indicated a statistically significant relationship between students’ 

prior experience with academic tasks and the number of notes 
written, F(4, 65) = 3.87, p < .05, along with the number of replies 
written, F(4, 65) = 3.56, p < .05. There was a significant 
relationship between students’ perceived task value and the 
number of links created, F(2, 65) = 6.47, p < .05. The use of the 
Co-author-notification tool was significantly associated with the 
number of notes written, F(1, 65) = 6.04, p < .05, and the number 
of replies written, F(1, 65) = 5.34, p < .05. The use of the 
Classwall-notification tool was significantly associated with the 
number of notes written, F(1,65) = 3.68, p = .05. The relationship 
between the Classwall-notification tool and the number of replies 
written was also statistically significant, F(1, 65) = 5.34, p < .05.  

 

 

4. CONCLUSIONS 
In this case study, we investigated the effects of students’ 

opting to use notification tools in a collaborative discourse-
intensive online course. Data analysis supported our hypothesis of 
active notifications positively influencing student contribution 
behavior. Of the six notification types, the Private-message 
notification tool was the most popular. Additionally, the Classwall 
and Co-author- notification tools were positively associated with 
note production in the learning community. Combined, these three 
notification tools represent an awareness of opportunities for 
students to engage in collaborative interactions in the 
environment. The use of these notification tools may be an 
indicator of the developed sense of collective cognitive 
responsibility in the community [5]. The positive correlation 
between notification use and student activity illustrates the need 
for students to generate a sense of affirmation and connectedness 
to their community. Findings from our data analysis also 
suggested student self-expectancy partially mediated the impact of 
the use of notification tools on student contribution behavior. 
Given that student’s self-expectancy is the only mediator in this 
study, further exploration is needed to help us understand what 
factors could significantly influence this relationship.  

 

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Our thanks to Professors Jim Hewitt and Clare Brett and the 
Pepper team for their dedication in designing an online learning 
environment that supports discourse-intensive courses.  
 
 
 

6. REFERENCES 
[1] Atkinson J. W. (1964). An Introduction to Motivation. NJ: 

Van Nostrand. 

[2] Boettcher, J. V. (2007). Ten core principles for designing 
effective learning environments: Insights from brain research 
and pedagogical theory. Innovate: Journal of Online 
Education, 3(3).  

[3] Lulee, S. T. (2010). Basic Principles of Interaction for 
Learning in Web-Based Environment. 

[4] Verpoorten, D., Glahn, C., Kravcik, M., Ternier, S., & 
Specht, M. (2009). Personalization of learning in virtual 
learning environments. In Learning in the Synergy of 
Multiple Disciplines (pp. 52-66). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

[5] Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility 
for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.) Liberal 
Education in a Knowledge Society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: 
Open Court. 

[6] Weiner B. (1992). Human Motivation: Metaphors, Theories, 
and Research. CA: Sage. 

403





