Improving Learning through Achievement Priming in Crowdsourced Information Finding Microtasks  Ujwal Gadiraju L3S Research Center  Leibniz Universitat Hannover Appelstr. 9a, Hannover, Germany  gadiraju@L3S.de  Stefan Dietze L3S Research Center  Leibniz Universitat Hannover Appelstr. 9a, Hannover, Germany  dietze@L3S.de  ABSTRACT Crowdsourcing has become an increasingly popular means to ac- quire human input on demand. Microtask crowdsourcing market- places facilitate the access to millions of people (called workers) who are willing to participate in tasks in return for monetary re- wards or other forms of compensation. is paradigm presents a unique learning context where workers have to learn to complete tasks on-the-y by applying their learning immediately through the course of tasks. However, most workers typically dropout early in large batches of tasks, depriving themselves of the opportunity to learn on-the-y through the course of batch completion. By doing so workers squander a potential chance at improving their performance and completing tasks eectively. In this paper, we propose a novel method to engage and retain workers, to improve their learning in crowdsourced information nding tasks by using achievement priming. rough rigorous experimental ndings, we show that it is possible to retain workers in long batches of tasks by triggering their inherent motivation to achieve and excel. As a consequence of increased worker retention, we nd that workers learn to perform more eectively, depicting relatively more sta- ble accuracy and lower task completion times in comparison to workers who drop out early.  CCS CONCEPTS Applied computing Education; Information systems World Wide Web; Human-centered computing Human com- puter interaction (HCI);  KEYWORDS Crowdsourcing, Microtasks, Learning, Retention, Crowd Workers, Information Finding, Achievement Priming  ACM Reference format: Ujwal Gadiraju and Stefan Dietze. 2016. Improving Learning through Achievement Priming in Crowdsourced Information Finding Microtasks. In Proceedings of ACM LAK Conference, Vancouver, BC, Canada, March 13-17, 2017 (LAK17), 10 pages. DOI: hp://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027402  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for prot or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permied. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specic permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. LAK17, Vancouver, BC, Canada  2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. . .$$15.00 DOI: hp://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027402  Figure 1: Typical task consumption in long batches of tasks, depicting low worker retention rate (amount of work on the y-axis, distinct workers on the x-axis). Very few workers complete all the available tasks in a batch, thereby maximizing the opportunity to learn through the course of the batch. Most workers drop out aer completing only a few tasks in a long batch.  1 INTRODUCTION In a technologically advanced world today, there are still several problems that cannot be solved by machines alone and require human intervention. In the last decade crowdsourcing has emerged as an eective paradigm that enables access to human intelligence at scale, thereby playing a pivotal role in hybrid man-machine systems. Paid crowdsourcing platforms provide a means to reach millions of people around the world (called crowd workers), creating endless opportunities to acquire human input at scale in return for monetary rewards. Amazons Mechanical Turk (AMT1) and CrowdFlower2 are popular examples of microtask crowdsourcing platforms, where requesters3 can easily access labor on demand and leverage the prevalent wisdom and skills to satisfy varying requirements. e principle categories of crowdsourced work on such platforms are diverse; information nding, verication and validation, interpretation and analysis, content creation, content access and surveys [15].  Understanding various aspects of crowd workers such as their motivations, behavior, and capabilities has been pivotal in building crowd-powered systems that are ecient (in terms of costs incurred) and eective (in terms of quality of the results produced) [16, 24]. Crowd workers have been shown to participate in crowdsourcing 1hps://www.mturk.com/ 2hps://www.crowdower.com/ 3Requesters are people who deploy tasks on crowdsourcing platforms to gather re- sponses from crowd workers.  https://www.mturk.com/ https://www.crowdflower.com/   LAK17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada Ujwal Gadiraju and Stefan Dietze  due to various intrinsic and extrinsic motivations; to earn their primary livelihood or as a secondary source of income [22], for community or enjoyment related motivations [2, 3], or due to the meaningfulness of their contributions [6]. Inherent human factors play an important role in the dynamics of crowd work on microtask platforms [25, 34].  Previous work in technology enhanced learning has brought to fore the unique learning environment that characterizes the crowd- sourcing paradigm [14]. Authors reected on the short-lived learn- ing phase and the immediate application of learned concepts in crowdsourcing microtasks. While it is a general notion that crowd- sourcing microtasks are short and can be completed quickly, a recent analysis of tasks on AMT over a ve year period (from 2009- 14) has shown that a majority of tasks are deployed in large batches [9]. e authors showed that such large batches of repetitive tasks are more aractive to crowd workers compared to shorter batches. However, it was found that long batches tend to starve towards the end; with a fewer number of available tasks to complete in such batches, fewer workers choose to contribute. Retaining workers in tasks for as long as possible is useful since workers who gain experience through the course of task completion become more eective. Empirical evidence supports the notion that workers who complete large batches of tasks exhibit a tendency to learn through the course of batch completion [8]. is suggests that by retaining workers longer in microtasks of a given type, it is possible to induce learning, resulting in improved worker performance over time. In this paper, we tackle the problem of retaining crowd workers in large batches of microtasks to facilitate learning among workers.  We aim to improve worker retention in the real-world crowd- sourcing microtask category of information nding. Information nding tasks were found to be on the rise on AMT in a recent data-driven study [9]. Some of such typical tasks that were de- ployed on AMT in the past include nding contact details on a list of websites, email addresses of a series of people, TV-shows listed on dierent channels, and so forth. Oen such tasks involve large batches where workers need to adopt and repeat the same workow to accomplish the objectives. We explore the potential of triggering the motivation to achieve among crowd workers, with an aim to improve their retention in crowdsourcing tasks and thereby facilitate learning. To this end, we investigate the applicability of achievement priming to retain workers in information nding tasks. We measure the eectiveness of our approach in terms of (i) the worker retention rate, dened by the average number of tasks that workers complete in a given batch of available tasks, (ii) worker per- formance, i.e., the accuracy with which workers complete the tasks, and (iii) the worker learning rate, that describes the average change in worker performance through the course of batch completion.  2 RESEARCH QUESTIONS Several studies have armed that the primary motivation of most workers to participate in crowd work is to earn monetary rewards that can contribute to their income and livelihood [15, 22]. We also know that crowd workers aim to maintain a high level of accuracy in their work and a good reputation to access more tasks, thereby maximizing their earnings [23]. We build on this understanding of the crowd workers general aitude to accomplish good work, and  investigate the potential of stimulating their motivation to elicit good quality and sustained work.  Achievement Motivation. Achievement motivation can be dened as the need for success or aainment of excellence [32]. A number of prior works in psychology have studied achievement motivation. McClelland rst proposed that achievement motivation may be understood as a motivational process that involves the regulation of dierent social goals [28]. is was supported by more recent research corresponding to goal pursuits [35]. In this paper, we adopt the understanding of achievement motivation proposed by Hart and Albarracin [20]; the goal to achieve is an alternative to the goal to have fun or indulge in leisurely activity. e authors show that people choose to pursue excellence (at the expense of having fun) or pursue fun (at the expense of achieving) depending on their level of chronic achievement motivation (the amount of pleasure in achieving goals). People with high chronic achievement motivation exhibit goal-seeking behavior when they encounter motivational triggers, while those with low chronic achievement motivation exhibit a fun-seeking behavior in such cases.  We aim to address the following research questions with respect to information nding (IF ) tasks. RQ1 How can achievement priming be used to increase worker  retention and facilitate learning in IF tasks RQ2 How is the learning process of workers eected when they  are retained in long batches of IF tasks Based on prior works discussed earlier and crowd worker moti-  vations, we construct the following hypotheses. Hyp-I : Worker Retention On presenting crowd workers with  motivational stimuli in the form of achievement primes, we can improve the worker retention rate and thereby facilitate learning.  Hyp-II : Worker Learning When workers are retained in long batches of information nding tasks, they learn more about the tasks and perform more eectively.  3 RELATED LITERATURE e unconscious manipulation of participants behavior (in the sense that subjects are not aware of being manipulated [21]) by means of semantic or pictorial cues is known as priming to be- havior [1]. A large number of studies have presented empirical evidence that it is possible to positively aect participants achieve- ments in dierent types of tasks by means of verbal ([12, 20]) or pictorial ([36]) cues.  We position and compare our work in this paper to the following two distinct realms of related work.  3.1 Priming in Crowdsourcing Environments Researchers have also studied the impact of aective priming on creativity of people. Lewis et al. presented a method for manip- ulating aect by using pictures [26]. rough their experiments with crowd workers on Amazons Mechanical Turk (AMT), the authors showed that positive aective priming helped to improve the quality of ideas generated in two tasks testing the creativity of workers. Similarly, Morris et al. explored the use of aective priming and aective pre-screening to improve the creativity of crowd workers [29, 30]. In these works, the authors used musical excerpts as postive and negative primes, and found that positively    Improving Learning through Achievement Priming in Crowdsourced Microtasks LAK17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada  (a) Diculty-Level I (level-I) (b) Diculty-Level II (level-II) (c) Diculty-Level III (level-III)  Figure 2: Progressive diculty-levels in the information nding task of nding the middle-names of famous persons.  valenced music can signicantly enhance the creative performance of workers on AMT. Following research that suggested the inuence of individual personality dierences in performance with visual- izations [18], Harrison et al. showed that aective priming can be used to inuence user performance in classic graphical perception tasks [19].  Although these prior works use crowd workers and crowdsourc- ing platforms to show that aective priming can help in improving the performance of workers, the tasks that were used to gauge the impact of aective priming were largely cognitive tests requiring insight and creative problem-solving, that do not suciently corre- spond to the landscape of real-world microtasks. To our knowledge this is the rst work that investigates the applicability of priming techniques in real-world microtask crowdsourcing.  3.2 Learning and Retention in Microtasks In previous work, authors analyzed the task performance and learn- ing outcomes in a real-world classroom setup, showing that ap- propriate learning conditions resulted in an improvement in task performance [10]. Other work proposed the use of crowdsourcing in classrooms to improve the learning process of students by receiv- ing feedback on learning material [11]. In [14], authors introduced crowd workers as learners in a unique learning environment and showed that implicit and explicit training can help to improve the performance of workers in crowdsourced microtasks.  It is known that a majority of crowdsourced microtasks are repet- itive in nature and consist of batches of similar tasks [9]. Working for long periods on such tasks can lead to boredom and fatigue, re- sulting in a potential drop in worker performance and productivity. Previous works have addressed this issue and proposed dierent means to retain and engage workers. Rzeszotarski et al. suggested introducing micro-breaks into workows to refresh workers, and showed that under certain conditions micro-breaks help to retain workers and improve their accuracy slightly [33]. Similarly, Dai et al. proposed to intersperse diversions (small periods of entertainment) to improve worker experience in lengthy, monotonous microtasks and found that such micro-diversions can signicantly improve worker retention rate while maintaining worker performance [7]. Other works proposed the use of gamication to increase worker retention and throughput [13]. Mao et al. studied worker engage- ment, characterized how workers perceive tasks and proposed to predict when workers would stop performing tasks [27]. Difallah et al. introduced pricing schemes to improve worker retention, and showed that paying periodic bonuses according to pre-dened mile- stones has the biggest impact on retention rate of workers [8]. A side eect of workers dropping out early in long batches is the lack of opportunity to facilitate learning among participating workers.  In contrast to these prior works, we aim to improve worker re- tention and learning rate by relying on inherent characteristics of workers (i.e., their level of chronic achievement motivation),  thereby triggering goal-seeking behavior. Moreover, channeling the workers achievement motivation to improve worker engage- ment and retention is a relatively less intrusive approach due to no tangible change in the workow, from a workers standpoint.  4 METHODOLOGY AND SETUP 4.1 Task Design - Information Finding Since there has been a steep rise in information nding tasks on the most popular microtask crowdsourcing platform, Amazons Mechanical Turk (AMT), we consider this type of tasks [9]. We adopt the task of nding the middle-names of famous people, to emulate the workow of real-world information nding microtasks where workers are typically asked to nd contact details, addresses, or names of particular people, organizations or companies. De- pending on the information that is to be searched for on the web, these tasks may comprise of varying diculty. Recent work has shown how task complexity plays an important role in worker per- formance [37]. To account for varying levels of the inherent task diculty in our information nding tasks and to study the impact of task diculty on worker learning rate, we model task diculty objectively into 3 levels, wherein workers need to consider an ad- ditional aspect in each progressively dicult level as shown in Figure 2. In level-I, workers are presented with unique names of famous persons, such that the middle-names can be found using a simple search on Google4 or Wikipedia5. In level-II workers are additionally provided with the profession of the given person. We manually selected the names such that there are at least two dierent individuals with the given names in level-II, and the distinguishing factor that the workers need to rely upon is their profession. In level-III workers are presented names of persons, their profession, and a year during which the persons were active in the given profession. ere are multiple distinct individuals with the given names, associated with the same profession in level-III. e workers are required to identify the accurate middle-name by relying on the year in which the person was active in the given profession.  4.2 Inspiringotes as Achievement Primes In their studies of achievement behavior, Hart and Albarracin used words that emulated achievement-related meanings as achievement primes (such as win, master, achieve, excel and so forth) [20]. In this work, we hypothesize that inspirational quotes about achievement by famous and successful gures can instill a similar priming eect. We manually collected 100 quotes from hp://www. brainyquote.com/ by searching for quotes related to achievement. To pick the quotes which can be considered to emulate inspiration, we deployed a crowdsourcing task on CrowdFlower, gathering 10 4hp://google.com/ 5hp://en.wikipedia.org/  http://www.brainyquote.com/ http://www.brainyquote.com/ http://google.com/ http://en.wikipedia.org/   LAK17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada Ujwal Gadiraju and Stefan Dietze  judgments from distinct workers on a 5-point Likert scale (as shown in Figure 3) on each of the 100 quotes. We awarded workers with 4 USD cents for every 10 quotes that they rated, and controlled for quality by using aention check questions [16]. Based on the average aggregated rating corresponding to each quote, we consider the top 25 quotes as our achievement primes (all with an average rating >= 4.5).  Figure 3: Task to standardize inspiring quotes.  4.3 Measuring Achievement Motivation We measure the level of chronic achievement motivation of workers using the excellence motivation subscale introduced by Cassidy and Lynn to capture ones motivation to pursue standards of excellence [5]. e scale had good internal reliability by means of Cronbachs reliability coecient,  = .71. Workers rate seven questions6 on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1:Not at all like me to 5:Ex- tremely like me. We computed the level of chronic achievement motivation for each worker by adding their responses to each of the seven questions aer appropriate reverse coding. Workers with an aggregated score greater than the scales midpoint (21) were consid- ered to be more achievement-oriented, and the remaining workers were considered to be more fun-oriented. We refer to the two groups of workers as the ACHIEVE and FUN groups respectively.  4.4 Study Design We consider the following variations in our studies. (i). Passive Achievement Priming (AP-Passive)  In this seing, crowd workers are presented with the quotes amidst the actual information nding units of the task. Workers do not necessarily have to interact with quotes beyond reading them (see Figure 4). e quotes act as passive achievement primes, and are randomly interspersed among units of the actual task. e order in which the quotes appear is also randomized to prevent ordering bias eects.  Figure 4: A passive achievement prime embedded between two units of the information nding task.  We deployed an initial task consisting of the excellence motiva- tion scale to measure the achievement motivation of workers on CrowdFlower. e task consisted of a few background questions, an aention check question, and seven questions corresponding to measuring their level of achievement motivation. On completion of 6hps://sites.google.com/site/lak2017learning/  Figure 5: An active achievement prime embedded between two units of the information nding task.  this task, workers were provided a link to participate in a follow-up information nding task if they wished (described earlier). In this seing, we gathered responses from a total of 240 distinct workers from the top-level on CrowdFlower. We gathered responses from these workers to additionally analyze and carry forward learnings to the other task setups about (i) the distribution of workers with high and low achievement motivation, (ii) the fraction of workers that would choose to participate in the follow-up task. Of these 240, 106 trustworthy workers7 participated in the follow-up information nding task with embedded passive achievement primes.  (ii). Active Achievement Priming (AP-Active)  In this seing, crowd workers are presented with quotes and are asked to nd the author of the quotes. By modeling the active achievement primes as information nding units, the workers treat these primes as a part of the actual task (the workow in both cases is to search the web to nd either a name or a middlename). ese quotes act as active achievement primes since there is a direct interaction in the workow with these primes. us, the active primes, masked as additional information nding units are randomly interspersed between the units of the actual task where workers are asked to nd the middle-names of people (see Figure 5).  We followed the same setup as described in the previous case of AP-Passive. Here we collected responses from 100 distinct top-level workers in the intial task consisting of the excellence mo- tivation scale deployed on CrowdFlower. ese workers were then presented with an opportunity to proceed onto a follow-up infor- mation nding task (with embedded active achievement primes). 56 trustworthy workers went on to participate in the follow-up task.  (iii). No Priming (NP-Baseline)  To adequately gauge the im- pact of passive and active achievement priming using inspirational quotes in information nding tasks with varying levels of diculty, we also consider the basic seing without any primes. All other task parameters remain the same as in case of passive and active achievement priming.  In this seing, since there were no primes embedded in the actual task, we directly deployed the information nding task on CrowdFlower and acquired responses from a total of 150 distinct top-level workers. Of these, 138 workers were trustworthy and we consider their responses alone in our analysis.  (iv) Randomotes for Achievement Priming (RQ-Passive and RQ-Active)  To verify that any impact on worker retention is due to the inspiring nature of quotes which in turn triggers the chronic achievement motivation of workers, we run two additional experi- ments with exactly the same seings as in case of AP-Passive and  7Trustworthy workers are those who responded correctly to a very simple aention check question.  https://sites.google.com/site/lak2017learning/   Improving Learning through Achievement Priming in Crowdsourced Microtasks LAK17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada  AP-Active primes but using randomly selected quotes unrelated to achievement or inspiration. To this end, we randomly select 100 quotes from hp://www.brainyquote.com/. We deployed a similar task on CrowdFlower as shown in Figure 3 to collect 10 indepen- dent judgments for each quote on a 5-point Likert scale, based on how inspiring workers found these random quotes. Once again, workers were paid 4 USD cents for every 10 quotes that they rated. Here, we chose the top 25 quotes which corresponded to the least aggregated average rating as our primes. From earlier experiments in (i) and (ii), we note that most crowd workers have a high level of chronic achievement motivation. us, we do not dierentiate between high and low level achievement motivation in this setup.  We replicate the task designs of AP-Passive and AP-Active conditions, with the only exception of introducing random quotes as primes. In the RQ-Passive seing, we gathered responses from 100 distinct trustworthy workers. In the RQ-Active seing we gathered judgments from 60 distinct workers, who were also al- lowed to complete as much work as they wished. Of these workers, 58 were found to be trustworthy and are considered for our further analysis.  4.5 Important Design Considerations We completely randomized the order of dierent units as well as the embedded primes (in case of AP-Passive, AP-Active) within the information nding tasks. e dierent variations of tasks were deployed on dierent days and we ensured that there was no overlap in the set of workers that participated across the three variations. To minimize timezone driven worker particpation eects, we deployed the tasks at the same time on the dierent days. Since the primary goal of our work is to improve worker retention and learning rate in information nding tasks, we chose to restrict participation to only the top-level workers on CrowdFlower to ensure reliability of our ndings. By considering three dierent levels of objective diculty of the information nding tasks, we can additionally measure the impact of task diculty on worker dropout rates. It is important to note that in all cases (AP-Passive, AP-Active, NP-Baseline) a worker who entered the information nding task was allowed to complete as much work as she wished to (up to a maximum of 120 units), without any experimentally induced constraints. Due to this reason, we can reliably measure worker retention (or dropout) rates. We compensated workers with 5 USD cents for each set of 10 units that they completed in all the variations. To satisfy minimum wage requisites we paid additional bonuses aer workers either completed the work, or dropped out.  4.6 Measuring Learning Rate As crowd workers proceed to complete the tasks in a given batch, and then move on to complete more batches of the same type, it has been shown that workers learn from their experience and begin to perform beer [8]. We aim to measure the overall worker learning rate across the dierent batches of tasks they complete. Let us consider, B = {b1,b2, ...,bi ,bj , ...,bn } to be the set of available batches of tasks of a given type. In the given task setup, we can assume that the dierence in worker performance from a given batch and that in the preceeding batch of tasks can be aributed to the learning (or a lack of learning) that has occurred. However,  this alone does not dene the rate at which the workers learn. For example, a worker can perform with a 100% accuracy across a sequence of batches while still learning from one batch to the next. is implies that the overall performance of the worker should also feature in measuring a workers learning rate.  Hence, we dene the worker learning rate as a linear combina- tion of the average dierence in worker performance from one batch to the next (called the learning constant, l ), and the overall performance of the worker across the dierent batches. us, we measure the learning rate of workers (denoted by Lr ) by using the following formula:  Lr = 1 n      1<i< (n1) i+1<j<n  (acc j  acci ) + n  k=1 (acck )     (1)  where, n is the number of batches in B that the given worker has completed, i = 1...(n  1), j = (i + 1)...n, k = 1...n, and acci represents the accuracy of a worker in the ith batch of tasks.  Note that the worker learning rate, Lr , can be either positive or negative. A positive learning rate indicates that a worker learns through the course of batch completion and depicts an improvement in performance, while a negative learning rate indicates that a worker does not learn through the course of batch completion and thereby depicts no improvement in performance.  5 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 5.1 Achievement Motivation in the Crowd Of the 240 workers that responded to the motivation excellence measurement task before entering the follow-up information nd- ing tasks in the AP-Passive condition, 211 workers corresponded to being achievement-oriented (ACHIEVE group) as opposed to fun- oriented (FUN group). Similarly, of the 100 workers that responded to the motivation excellence measurement task before entering the follow-up information nding tasks in the AP-Active condition 90 workers were found to belong to the ACHIEVE group. We believe that these distributions, indicating a high achievement motivation among crowd workers, can be explained by the primary motivation of most workers to participate in crowdsourcing microtasks; to earn and maximize monetary rewards [16], despite typically facing ob- stacles such as unfair pay or rejection of work, power asymmetries [23], and sub-optimal worker environments [17].  5.2 Results in Dierent Priming Conditions (i). Passive Achievement Priming We note that of the 106 trust- worthy workers that participated in the AP-Passive information nding tasks, 99 were found to be achievement-oriented and formed the ACHIEVE group, while 7 workers were found to be fun-oriented and constitute the FUN group.  Workers constituting the ACHIEVE group performed with a greater individual accuracy, depicted higher retention rates and produced a higher overall quality of work in comparison to the workers constituting the FUN group (see Table 1). However, the two groups are unbalanced and the dierences are not statistically signicant. e overall task accuracy is computed by considering  http://www.brainyquote.com/   LAK17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada Ujwal Gadiraju and Stefan Dietze  Table 1: Worker performance, retention, and task comple- tion time (TCT) in AP-Passive information nding tasks.  Achievement Avg. Acc. Worker Overall Avg. TCT Motivation Per Worker (%) Retention Rate (%) Task Acc. (%) (in mins)  ACHIEVE 79.60 36.78 80.96 10.74 FUN 75.85 26.19 74.25 9.60  the accuracy and the amount of work completed by each worker (i.e., the weighted average accuracy of all workers in the task).  (ii). Active Achievement Priming Of the 56 workers that partici- pated in the AP-Active information nding tasks, 53 workers were found to be achievement-oriented and formed the ACHIEVE group, while 3 workers were found to be fun-oriented and constitute the FUN group. Similar to our ndings in AP-Passive information nding tasks, workers in the ACHIEVE group performed with a greater individual accuracy, depicted higher retention rates and produced a higher overall quality of work (see Table 2). ese dierences however, were not found to be statistically signicant.  Table 2: Worker performance, retention, and task comple- tion time (TCT) in AP-Active information nding tasks.  Achievement Avg. Acc. Worker Overall Avg. TCT Motivation Per Worker (%) Retention Rate (%) Task Acc. (%) (in mins)  ACHIEVE 76.98 45.60 80.45 11.41 FUN 65.17 27.78 67 12.02  (iii). No Priming Table 3 presents our ndings with respect to worker performance, retention rate, and task completion time in the case where no primes are embedded in the information nding tasks, in comparison to the AP-Passive and AP-Active variations.  Figure 6 draws a comparison between the worker retention curves in each of the dierent priming conditions, where workers can submit a minimum of 10 units and a maximum of 120 units, i.e, the entire batch. rough multiple t-tests and Bonferroni correction, we note that there is a signicant improvement in the worker reten- tion rate (over 8%) in case of the AP-Active (M=44.64, SD=35.97 ) seing when compared to the NP-Baseline (M=36.23, SD=32.09) seing; t (192) = 1.735,p < .05, and Hedges g=.3. In addition, AP- Active corresponds to a higher retention rate when compared to AP-Passive (M=36.08, SD=31.53); t (160) = 1.698,p < .05. We did not observe a signicant dierence in the worker retention rate be- tween AP-Passive and NP-Baseline. e average task completion time of workers is signicantly lesser in case of the NP-Baseline (M=9.11, SD=4.28) seing in comparison to AP-Passive (M=10.67, SD=5.19); (t (242) = 2.551, p<.05), and also in comparison to AP- Active (M=11.44, SD=4.8); t (192) = 3.309,p < .05.  5.3 Do inspiring quotes matter We analyzed the performance of workers in the presence of ran- dom quotes as primes, and our ndings are presented in the Ta- ble 3. rough multiple t-tests and Bonferroni correction, we found that in the RQ-Passive seing, the worker retention rate (M=28.58, SD=24.22) is signicantly lesser than in AP-Active (M=44.64, SD=35.97); [t(154)= 3.321, p < .01], AP-Passive (M=36.08, SD=31.53); [t(204)= 1.907, p < .05], and NP-Baseline (M=36.23, SD=32.09); [t(236)= 2.01, p < .05]. In the RQ-Active seing,   0   10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90   100  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120  Pe rc  en ta  ge  o  f W or  ke rs  No. of Units Completed Before Dropping Out  AP-Passive AP-Active  NP-Baseline  Figure 6: A comparison of the worker retention curves in each of the dierent priming conditions.  Table 3: Worker performance, retention, and average task completion time (TCT) in the information nding tasks with dierent priming conditions.  Priming Avg. Acc. Worker Overall Avg. TCT Variation Per Worker (%) Retention Rate (%) Task Acc. (%) (in mins)  NP-Baseline 76.71 36.23 78.88 9.11* AP-Passive 77.72 36.08 77.60 10.67 AP-Active 76.35 44.64* 79.96 11.44 RQ-Passive 78.74 28.58 77.58 9.72 RQ-Active 74.81 32.61 75.41 9.87  the worker retention rate is 32.61%. is was found to be sig- nicantly lesser than the retention rate in the AP-Active condi- tion; t(112)=1.892, p < .05. We did not nd signicant dierences between the worker retention rate in RQ-Active and either AP- Passive or NP-Baseline. We also did not nd signicant dier- ences in the average worker accuracy and the overall task accuracy between each of the three priming conditions with respect to RQ- Passive and RQ-Active.  Based on our ndings, we can conrm that the improvement in the worker retention rate observed in the AP-Active seing can be aributed to the inspiring nature of quotes which act as achievement primes and trigger the intrinsic achievement motiva- tion of workers. Randomly selected quotes which are not inspiring in nature fail to have the same eect.  5.4 Eects of Task Diculty Recent work has shown the impact of intertask eects on the quality of responses from crowd workers [31]. e order of microtasks, especially with respect to their complexity, was shown to have a signicant impact on the quality of work produced [4]. us, it was important to control for intertask eects by randomizing the order of units, and doing so further with respect to their level of diculty. In this section, we describe our investigation of the impact of task diculty on worker accuracy and on worker retention rate.  To understand the inuence of task diculty on worker dropout, we illustrate the average fraction of information nding tasks that workers completed with respect to each of the three diculty levels (before dropping out) in Figure 7. Note that every worker that com- pleted all the 120 units in each of the seings, completed an equal fraction of 40 units corresponding to each level of diculty. We refer to such workers as nishers, and the fraction of participating workers who complete all the 120 units as the nisher rate. We    Improving Learning through Achievement Priming in Crowdsourced Microtasks LAK17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada  (a) NP-Baseline (b) AP-Active (c) AP-Passive  Figure 8: Average accuracy of workers in each of the short,medium, and long groups through the course of batch completion in the dierent priming conditions. Note that each batch (from B1 through B12) consisted of 10 tasks.  0  25  50  75  100  SHORT MEDIUM LONG Worker Groups  Ac cu  ra cy LONG  MEDIUM  SHORT  (a) NP-Baseline  25  50  75  100  SHORT MEDIUM LONG Worker Groups  Ac cu  ra cy LONG  MEDIUM  SHORT  (b) AP-Active  0  25  50  75  100  SHORT MEDIUM LONG Worker Groups  Ac cu  ra cy LONG  MEDIUM  SHORT  (c) AP-Passive  Figure 9: Overall accuracy per worker and each of the short,medium, and long groups across the dierent priming conditions. e y-axis presents the accuracy per worker in percentage.   0   10   20   30   40   50   60   70  NP-Baseline AP-Active AP-PassiveA vg  . F ra  ct io  n  of   U ni  ts  P  er  W  or ke  r( in   % )  Task Difficulty Levels  Level-I Difficulty Level-II Difficulty Level-III Difficulty  Dropout Rate (in %) Finisher Rate (in %)  Figure 7: e average fraction of units with a given di- culty that workers encountered in dierent settings until they dropped out, corresponding dropout and nisher rates.  observe the highest nisher rate (14.29%) and the least dropout rate (55.36%) in the AP-Active seing.  Table 4: Average accuracy of workers on units with varying levels of diculty in dierent priming conditions. * indi- cates statistical signicance at p < .05, ** at p < .01.  Priming Diculty Diculty Diculty Condition Level-I Level-II Level-III  NP-Baseline 84.79* 79.28 66.46 AP-Passive 88.86** 88.77** 65.55 AP-Active 77.82 83.18 69.86 Overall 83.82 83.75 67.29  Table 4 presents the average accuracy of workers on units with a given diculty level across the dierent priming conditions. To  assess the relationship between the level of diculty of the infor- mation nding tasks (modeled as an objective quantitative variable) and the average accuracy of workers across the dierent conditions, we computed Pearson r. We found a moderate negative correlation between the diculty level and the average accuracy of workers, r(894) = .30, R2 = .09, p < .001.  To assess the interaction eects between the priming condition and the task diculty on worker accuracy and retention rate, we computed a two-way MANOVA. is revealed a statistically sig- nicant interaction eect between the task diculty and priming condition on the dependent variables (worker accuracy and reten- tion rate); F(4,887)=2.14, p<.05; Wilks  = 0.98, 2p = .01.  Given the signicance of the overall test, the univariate main eects were examined for the worker accuracy and retention rate. We found a signicant dierence in the worker accuracies across the diculty levels; F(2,887)=58.51, p<.001, but not across the dier- ent priming conditions; F(2,887)=2.82, p=.06. In contrast, we found a signicant dierence in worker retention rates across the dierent priming conditions; F(2,887)=3.48, p<.05, but not across the di- culty levels; F(2,887)=1.85, p=.15. is was conrmed by post-hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test. Our ndings reveal the signicant dierences in impact of the dierent priming conditions on worker retention rates.  5.5 Learning rough the Batches To analyze the learning that workers exhibit through the course of task completion, we investigated their performance. We divided workers into three groups based on the number of units completed (similar to [8]); the short group consists of workers who completed 25% or less units, the medium group consists of workers who com- pleted more than 25% and less than or equal to 75% of the units, and    LAK17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada Ujwal Gadiraju and Stefan Dietze  the long group consists of workers who completed more than 75% of the units. Figure 10 presents the distribution of workers across the groups in each of the priming conditions. We note that the distributions are similar in case of AP-Passive and NP-Baseline. In case of AP-Active, we found that more workers belonged to the long group than medium, indicating the retention induced by the active achievement priming.   0   10   20   30   40   50   60   70  NP-Baseline AP-Active AP-Passive  Nu m  be r o  f W or  ke rs   in  th  e  Gr  ou p   (in  %  )  Different Priming Conditions  Short Medium Long  Figure 10: Distribution of workers into short, medium, and long groups as per the amount of work completed.  Since workers completed tasks in batches of 10 units, we ana- lyzed their accuracy across the batches (from B1 through a max- imum of B12, as there were 120 available units in total). Figure 8 presents the average accuracy of workers belonging to the short, medium and long groups across the batches of tasks in each of the priming conditions. We observe that in case of the NP-Baseline condtion, the average accuracy of workers tends to drop through the course of the batches across all three groups. In contrast, we note that there is a steady increase in the average accuracy of work- ers in the long group in case of the AP-Passive condition. We analyzed the overall accuracy of each worker in the groups, and our ndings are presented in Figure 9. We note that the average ac- curacy of workers does not vary across each of the three groups or the dierent priming conditions. However, in case of AP-Active, as workers complete more tasks the standard deviation in their accuracy becomes lower.  is is consistent with prior work, where authors found that workers who went on to complete more tasks in the best pricing scheme depicted an improvement in accuracy through the course of the tasks [8]. is suggests the impact of the active and passive priming conditions in retaining and engaging workers, enabling them to learn and apply learned concepts eciently through the course of long batches.  5.6 Worker Learning Rate We computed the learning rate of workers in the dierent priming conditions using the formula in Equation 1. Figure 11 presents our ndings with respect to the learning rate of workers in each of the short, medium and long groups across the priming conditions.  We found that the learning rate of workers is maximum in case of workers constituting the short group, and this gradually decreases in case of the medium group, and further in case of the long group (see Table 5). is can be explained intuitively by the fact that when workers begin a rst batch of new tasks of a given type, there is more to learn through the course of batch completion. Hence, those workers who complete only 25% of the tasks available, exhibit the  0.0  2.5  5.0  7.5  10.0  Short Medium Long Worker Groups  Le ar  nin g   Ra te   o f W  or ke  rs  NP-Baseline AP-Active AP-Passive  Figure 11: Learning Rate of workers in short, medium and long groups in the dierent priming conditions (stacked).  Table 5: Learning Rate of workers in the dierent groups across the priming conditions (* indicates signicance).  NP-Baseline AP-Active AP-Passive  Short 2.96 3.43* 3.15 Medium 1.28 1.30 1.55* Long 0.69 0.64 0.73 Overall Avg. 1.64 1.79 1.81  most learning rate on average. As workers proceed through towards the completion of all batches available (i.e., workers who constitute the medium and long groups), due to their learning progress, the learning rate gradually decreases.  0  5  10  15  Short Medium Long Worker Groups  Av g.   T as  k C om  ple tio  n  Ti  m  (i  n  m  ins )  NP-Baseline AP-Active AP-Passive  Figure 12: Task Completion Time (TCT) of workers in short, medium and long groups in dierent priming conditions.  e gradual decrease in learning rate through the course of batches coincides the eectiveness with which workers complete tasks within the batches. Figure 12 presents the average task com- pletion time (TCT) of the three groups of workers in the dierent priming conditions. is supports our hypothesis (Hyp-II) that with an increase in worker retention, workers learn to perform more eectively in information nding microtasks, i.e., worker accuracy stabilizes as seen in Figure 9 and the TCT of workers decreases.    Improving Learning through Achievement Priming in Crowdsourced Microtasks LAK17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada  6 DISCUSSION In our experiments, by using the excellence motivation scale we ob- served that a vast majority of crowd workers belong to theACHIEVE group, i.e., they exhibit a prioritization of achievement over hav- ing fun, in contrast to the FUN group. is observation can be explained from two complementary standpoints. It is a well under- stood notion that crowd work can be tedious, monotonous and is oen rewarded with meager pay. It is in these circumstances that crowd workers seek to earn monetary rewards, indicating an inher- ent motivation and a will to excel. We enforced the CrowdFlower lter of recruiting the highest quality crowd workers. For these workers to consistently complete several tasks while maintaining a high accuracy (leading to their highest quality level qualica- tion on CrowdFlower8), we argue that it takes more than skill and competence, indicating further motivation. Although we found that workers belonging to the ACHIEVE group depicted beer per- formance (accuracy and retention rate) in comparison to the FUN group, due to the highly skewed sample sizes the dierences were not statistically signicant. is however, means that a majority of crowd workers can be positively motivated and retained in long batches of information nding tasks, enabling them to learn and improve their performance.  Based on our experimental ndings, we observe a signicant impact of active achievement priming on worker retention in infor- mation nding tasks. e AP-Active priming condition leads to an improvement of over 8% in worker retention when compared to the NP-Baseline and AP-Passive conditions. is supports our hypothesis that achievement priming can improve worker retention in information nding tasks (Hyp-I). However, we note that the laer conditions correspond to a faster task completion time. is can be explained by the fact that (i) in the AP-Passive condition, workers dont necessarily have a direct interaction with the primes and can proceed in the tasks by ignoring them, and (ii) in the NP- Baseline condition workers do not encounter primes; they neither have to read quotes nor nd author names that otherwise constitute additional units of work. We also found that the improvement in worker retention in the AP-Active priming condition was due to the inspiring quotes stimulating the inherent achievement moti- vation among workers. Worker retention rate deteriorates when using random primes that are not inspiring, thereby serving only as a distraction to the workers.  e AP-Active priming condition led to an improvement in the average learning rate of workers by nearly 8.5% compared to the NP-Baseline. Similarly, the AP-Passive priming condition improved the worker learning rate by nearly 10.5%.  By acknowledging the fact that information nding tasks that are typically crowdsourced have varying levels of diculty, we in- vestigated and found signicant eects of task diculty on worker accuracy. However, we found task diculty did not eect the worker retention rate. Worker retention rate was eected by the priming conditions signicantly, notably by the AP-Active con- dition. e improvement in worker retention rate due to active achievement priming using inspirational quotes and the impact on  8hp://crowdowercommunity.tumblr.com/post/80598014542/ introducing-contributor-performance-levels  work quality (wherein workers who complete more work improve their accuracy) support Hyp-II.  6.1 Caveats and Limitations We investigated the average number of primes that workers en- counter in each batch of 10 units. We found that in both conditions there were 2 primes on average across each batch of 10 units, with SD=.55 in case of AP-Passive and SD=.44 in case of AP-Active, indicating no bias due to the frequency of primes.  In our experiments, we considered a pool of 25 (active or passive) achievement primes that were randomly distributed over a batch of 120 units. We found that 2 primes in each set of 10 units on average triggered workers suciently (in AP-Active condition) to complete more work in the batch. However, further experiments are required to draw conclusions regarding the optimal frequency of achievement primes across the batch of units to maximize worker retention. We took care to ensure that workers were unaware of the achievement primes that are embedded into the actual task. We aempted to achieve this by integrating the primes into the design and not disrupting the workow in case of AP-Passive, and by creating the same interaction with the active prime as with other units of work in the AP-Active condition.  Our measure for worker learning rate is simplistic, in that we do not consider external factors such as worker fatigue and boredom, previous experiences with similar tasks and so forth, that may eect the learning rate of workers.  6.2 Ethical Considerations We must consider the ethical implications of using achievement priming in crowdsourcing microtasks. Achievement primes should not just be used to increase worker retention rates, but also with an aim to help improve the workers performance and widen the corresponding monetary opportunities and returns. If achievement primes are used to retain workers for relatively longer periods of time, workers should be adequately compensated. Paying heed to the ethical aspects of design and compensation with respect to achievement priming, we believe that in the digitally immersive current age, we are inadvertently but constantly primed by several aspects around us. It is the duty of task requesters to ensure that workers are not adversely aected due to irresponsible task design. However, due to the short-lived eects of priming we believe that if achievement priming is used responsibly it can be a useful means to improve crowd work and positively eect task consumption in crowdsourcing marketplaces.  7 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTUREWORK In this paper, we investigated the use of achievement priming tech- niques to improve worker retention and learning rate in crowd- sourced information nding tasks. We found that a vast majority of workers who participated in our tasks from the highest quality level on CrowdFlower are driven by achievement as opposed to fun. us, we proposed the use of inspirational quotes from famous peo- ple as achievement primes, and showed that active interaction with these primes in an inadvertent manner within information nding tasks led to a signicant improvement in the worker retention rate (over 8% on comparison to the baseline method devoid of primes).  http://crowdflowercommunity.tumblr.com/post/80598014542/introducing-contributor-performance-levels http://crowdflowercommunity.tumblr.com/post/80598014542/introducing-contributor-performance-levels   LAK17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada Ujwal Gadiraju and Stefan Dietze  Further investigation of work quality between groups of workers who completed varying amounts of work in dierent priming con- ditions, revealed that workers who encountered active achievement primes show an improvement in their accuracies during the course of the tasks and exhibit relatively more stable performance (low standard deviation). We proposed worker learning rate as a metric to measure the learning that occurs when workers complete tasks or batches of tasks of a given type. We found that in addition to improving worker retention, achievement priming improves the learning rate of workers (thereby answering RQ1, RQ2).  Our ndings and the novel method for improving learning in in- formation nding tasks enrich the current understanding of crowd work and structuring workow. In the imminent future, we will investigate the use of achievement priming in other domains of crowd work. We also aim to investigate how task framing can inuence goal prioritization of crowd workers.  Acknowledgments is research has been supported in part by the European Commis- sion within the H2020-ICT-2015 Programme (AFEL project, Grant Agreement No. 687916), and the Erasmus+ Agreement 2015-1-LI01- KA203-000041 (Learning Analytics and Learning Process Manage- ment for Small Size Organisations in Higher Education). We also thank Peter Holtz for his valuable advise and feedback from the Psychology perspective.  REFERENCES [1] John A Bargh, Peter M Gollwitzer, Annee Lee-Chai, Kimberly Barndollar, and  Roman Trotschel. 2001. e automated will: nonconscious activation and pursuit of behavioral goals. Journal of personality and social psychology 81, 6 (2001), 1014.  [2] Daren C Brabham. 2008. Moving the crowd at iStockphoto: e composition of the crowd and motivations for participation in a crowdsourcing application. First monday 13, 6 (2008).  [3] Daren C Brabham. 2010. Moving the crowd at readless: Motivations for participation in a crowdsourcing application. Information, Communication & Society 13, 8 (2010), 11221145.  [4] Carrie J Cai, Shamsi T Iqbal, and Jaime Teevan. 2016. Chain reactions: e impact of order on microtask chains. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI16). ACM, Vol. 6.  [5] Tony Cassidy and Richard Lynn. 1989. A multifactorial approach to achieve- ment motivation: e development of a comprehensive measure. Journal of Occupational Psychology (1989).  [6] Dana Chandler and Adam Kapelner. 2013. Breaking monotony with meaning: Motivation in crowdsourcing markets. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organi- zation 90 (2013), 123133.  [7] Peng Dai, Jerey M Rzeszotarski, Praveen Paritosh, and Ed H Chi. 2015. And now for something completely dierent: Improving crowdsourcing workows with micro-diversions. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing. ACM, 628638.  [8] Djellel Eddine Difallah, Michele Catasta, Gianluca Demartini, and Philippe Cudre- Mauroux. 2014. Scaling-up the crowd: Micro-task pricing schemes for worker retention and latency improvement. In Second AAAI Conference on Human Com- putation and Crowdsourcing.  [9] Djellel Eddine Difallah, Michele Catasta, Gianluca Demartini, Panagiotis G Ipeiro- tis, and Philippe Cudre-Mauroux. 2015. e dynamics of micro-task crowdsourc- ing: e case of amazon mturk. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 238247.  [10] Son Do-Lenh, Patrick Jermann, Sebastien Cuendet, Guillaume Zuerey, and Pierre Dillenbourg. 2010. Task performance vs. learning outcomes: a study of a tangible user interface in the classroom. In European Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning. Springer, 7892.  [11] Steven Dow, Elizabeth Gerber, and Audris Wong. 2013. A pilot study of using crowds in the classroom. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 227236.  [12] Stefan Engeser. 2009. Nonconscious activation of achievement goals: moderated by word class and the explicit achievement motive Swiss Journal of Psychology  68, 4 (2009), 193200. [13] Oluwaseyi Feyisetan, Elena Simperl, Max Van Kleek, and Nigel Shadbolt. 2015.  Improving paid microtasks through gamication and adaptive furtherance in- centives. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 333343.  [14] Ujwal Gadiraju, Besnik Fetahu, and Ricardo Kawase. 2015. Training Workers for Improving Performance in Crowdsourcing Microtasks. In Design for Teaching and Learning in a Networked World. Springer, 100114.  [15] Ujwal Gadiraju, Ricardo Kawase, and Stefan Dietze. 2014. A taxonomy of mi- crotasks on the web. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM conference on Hypertext and social media. ACM, 218223.  [16] Ujwal Gadiraju, Ricardo Kawase, Stefan Dietze, and Gianluca Demartini. 2015. Understanding Malicious Behavior in Crowdsourcing Platforms: e Case of Online Surveys. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea, April 18-23, 2015. 16311640.  [17] Neha Gupta, David Martin, Benjamin V Hanrahan, and Jacki ONeill. 2014. Turk- life in India. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Supporting Group Work. ACM.  [18] Lane Harrison, Ronald Chang, and Aidong Lu. 2012. Exploring the impact of emotion on visual judgement. In Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), 2012 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 227228.  [19] Lane Harrison, Drew Skau, Steven Franconeri, Aidong Lu, and Remco Chang. 2013. Inuencing visual judgment through aective priming. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 29492958.  [20] William Hart and Dolores Albarracn. 2009. e eects of chronic achievement motivation and achievement primes on the activation of achievement and fun goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 97, 6 (2009), 1129.  [21] E Tory Higgins and John A Bargh. 1987. Social cognition and social perception. Annual review of psychology 38, 1 (1987).  [22] Panagiotis G Ipeirotis, Foster Provost, and Jing Wang. 2010. ality management on amazon mechanical turk. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD workshop on human computation. ACM.  [23] Lilly C Irani and M Silberman. 2013. Turkopticon: interrupting worker invisibility in amazon mechanical turk. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 611620.  [24] Nicolas Kaufmann, imo Schulze, and Daniel Veit. 2011. More than fun and money. Worker Motivation in Crowdsourcing-A Study on Mechanical Turk.. In AMCIS, Vol. 11. 111.  [25] Walter S Lasecki, Samuel C White, Kyle I Murray, and Jerey P Bigham. 2012. Crowd memory: Learning in the collective. arXiv preprint arXiv:1204.3678 (2012).  [26] Sheena Lewis, Mira Dontcheva, and Elizabeth Gerber. 2011. Aective computa- tional priming and creativity. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 735744.  [27] Andrew Mao, Ece Kamar, and Eric Horvitz. 2013. Why stop now predicting worker engagement in online crowdsourcing. In First AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing.  [28] David C McClelland. 1965. Toward a theory of motive acquisition. American psychologist 20, 5 (1965), 321.  [29] Robert R Morris, Mira Dontcheva, Adam Finkelstein, and Elizabeth Gerber. 2013. Aect and creative performance on crowdsourcing platforms. In Aective computing and intelligent interaction (ACII), 2013 humaine association conference on. IEEE, 6772.  [30] Robert R Morris, Mira Dontcheva, and Elizabeth M Gerber. 2012. Priming for beer performance in microtask crowdsourcing environments. Internet Computing, IEEE 16, 5 (2012).  [31] Edward Newell and Derek Ruths. 2016. How One Microtask Aects Another. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM.  [32] Sco T Rabideau. 2005. Eects of achievement motiva- tion on behavior. Retrieved from Personality Research: hp://www.personalityresearch.org/papers/rabideau.htm (2005).  [33] Jerey M Rzeszotarski, Ed Chi, Praveen Paritosh, and Peng Dai. 2013. Inserting micro-breaks into crowdsourcing workows. In First AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing.  [34] Harini Alagarai Sampath, Rajeev Rajeshuni, Bipin Indurkhya, Saraschandra Karanam, and Koustuv Dasgupta. 2013. Eect of Task Presentation on the Performance of Crowd WorkersA Cognitive Study. In First AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing.  [35] James Y Shah and Arie W Kruglanski. 2008. e challenge of change in goal systems. e Handbook of Motivation Science (2008), 217229.  [36] Amanda Shantz and Gary Latham. 2011. e eect of primed goals on employee performance: Implications for human resource management. Human Resource Management 50, 2 (2011), 289299.  [37] Jie Yang, Judith Redi, Gianluca Demartini, and Alessandro Bozzon. 2016. Mod- eling Task Complexity in Crowdsourcing. In Proceedings of e Fourth AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing. AAAI.   	Abstract 	1 Introduction 	2 Research Questions 	3 Related Literature 	3.1 Priming in Crowdsourcing Environments 	3.2 Learning and Retention in Microtasks  	4 Methodology and Setup 	4.1 Task Design - Information Finding 	4.2 Inspiring Quotes as Achievement Primes 	4.3 Measuring Achievement Motivation 	4.4 Study Design 	4.5 Important Design Considerations 	4.6 Measuring Learning Rate  	5 Results and Analysis 	5.1 Achievement Motivation in the Crowd 	5.2 Results in Different Priming Conditions 	5.3 Do `inspiring' quotes matter 	5.4 Effects of Task Difficulty 	5.5 Learning Through the Batches 	5.6 Worker Learning Rate  	6 Discussion 	6.1 Caveats and Limitations 	6.2 Ethical Considerations  	7 Conclusions and Future Work 	References   