An Outcome-based Dashboard for Moodle and Open EdX   Xiao Hu1, Xiangyu Hou2, Chi-Un Lei2, Chengrui Yang3 Jeremy Ng1  1 Faculty of Education, 2 Technology-Enriched Learning Initiative, 3 Deparment of Computer Science   The University of Hong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong   {xiaoxhu, hxiangyu, culei, aaron102, jeremyng}@hku.hk   ABSTRACT  This poster presents a cross-platform learning analytics dashboard  on Moodle and Open edX for monitoring outcome-based learning   progress. The dashboard visualizes students interactions with the  platforms in near real-time, aiming to help teachers and students  monitor students learning progress. The dashboard has been used  in four large-size general education courses in a comprehensive  university in Hong Kong, undergoing evaluation and improvement.       CCS Concepts   Human-centered computing  Visual analytics   Applied   computing  Learning management systems    Keywords  Moodle; Open edX, outcome-based learning; dashboard   1. INTRODUCTION  Learning Management Systems (LMS) such as Moodle record  learners interactions with various course components, providing  opportunities to monitor students progress in near real-time. In  response to the need of outcome-based learning [1], a Learning   Analytics (LA) dashboard was developed to visualize students  learning progress towards course learning outcomes. Based on  online behavior logs recorded in the LMS, the dashboard may help  teachers identify at-risk students and decide on possible  interventions [2][3]. It also can provide near real-time feedback to  students, facilitating self-monitoring and self-assessment during  the entire period of the course [4]. This poster demonstrates the  dashboard implemented in Moodle and Open edX, particularly the   system architecture, analytic functions, visualizations, and  preliminary evaluations with teachers and students.   2. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  The dashboard on Moodle adopts the Model-View-Controller  (MVC) paradigm. The view is responsible for all visualizations  while the controller requests data from the server using AJAX and  feeds the data to the view. The server side is mainly responsible for  statistics calculation based on user activities recorded in Moodle.   The calculated results are stored in a database for efficient retrieval.  On edX, XBlock is the fundamental component to build online  sources. Our dashboard, XAct, is implemented as one of the  customized XBlocks. Similar to the Moodle dashboard, XAct  server can fetch data from the edX database and transfer analyzed  results to the client through AJAX. Through visualizations  generated with the D3 library, XAct supports students to check  his/her own online learning behaviours in near real-time.   3. ANALYTICAL FUNCTIONS  On both platforms, teachers first link course components (e.g.,  video, quiz) to course outcomes through a HTML block page   (Moodle) or XBlock edit mode (Open edX). On Moodle, student  actions including view, submit, create, start, review, and update  performed on linked components are counted. On Open edX, click  streams such as video interactions, page reading and quiz  answering recorded in the system are calculated for visualizations.  A students learning progress on a course component is calculated  in a relative manner, against a statistic upper limit of student  activities on this component. To avoid effects of outliers, the upper   limit is calculated as 3rd quartile + 1.5* interquartile range of  activity counts of all students. Students with an activity count  exceeding the upper limit will be given a full score (i.e., 100%).   The progress towards a learning outcome is the aggregation of  progress scores of all components linked to that outcome. To  prevent students from gaming the system, restrictions on  frequencies of actions performed on various types of components  (e.g., forums) are added.    4. VISUALIZATIONS   4.1 Progress Towards Learning Outcomes  On Moodle, the dashboard is shown as a Block on the course  homepage where a students progress towards each course learning  outcome is shown using a traffic-light metaphor: green for good  progress; yellow for fair and red for poor (Figure 1). This block also  contains a link to a detailed personal report page. The same  colour codes are applicable to all pages.      Figure 1. Students view of the Moodle block on course page   The personal report page lists all learning outcomes of the course.  For each outcome the students progress and the class average are  both shown for easy comparison (Figure 2).       Figure 2. Student activeness on each outcome (Moodle)    Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for   personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are   not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies   bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-  party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact   the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).   LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada   ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029483    http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029483   Similarly, the XAct presents a vertical-bar chart to show each  students progress towards each learning outcome (Figure 3).     Figure 3. Student progress on each outcome (Open edX)    4.2 Progress on Course Components/Topics  On Moodle, clicking a learning outcome on a student report (Figure  2) leads to the students progress in each course component linked   to that outcome (Figure 4). Similarly, on Open edX, a chart  represents how much content on each topic a student has ever  interacted with (Figure 5). Instructors can configure which course  components are relevant to which topics. As Open edX is a video- centric learning environment, most topics include video and  quizzes. It is thus deemed that progress on topics would be more  informative. In addition, another component-based visualization is  implemented in the XAct dashboard (Figure 6), showing how a  student consumed different types of learning contents.      Figure 4. Student progress on course components (Moodle)     Figure 5. Student progress on course topics (Open edX)      Figure 6. Activities on main course components (Open edX)     4.3 Teachers Views  On Moodle, teachers also have access to visualizations for the   overall class progress. These visualizations show the class average  progress towards course learning outcomes, in forms like Figures 2  and 4. Instructors can also click into a list of individual students  progresses either on an outcome or a component (Figure 7) where  the student name is linked to that students individual report  (Figures 2 and 4). In this way, instructors can observe progresses  of the class as a whole and those of individual students. Particularly,  students with a below-average progress can be easily identified and  pedagogical interventions can be applied to them.      Figure 7. All-student report of progress (Moodle)   5. EVALUATION  The Moodle dashboard has been used in three general education  courses, in the areas of Political Science, Social Work, and  Education, each with about 120 students. A 4-minute instructional  video was played to the students in-class, teaching them how to use  the dashboard. To measure the effectiveness of the dashboard,  students were surveyed in the first and last lectures, and some are   invited to participate in follow-up interviews. The Open edX  version has been deployed in a technological general education  course towards the end of the course. 89 of the 120 students have  accessed the dashboard 711 times, within 8 days, and checked the  dashboard for 1.73 minute on average. Some students reported to  have used the dashboard to identify missed contents in the course.  Views of some peripheral (e.g. tutorial) videos have increased  significantly after introducing the dashboard. These indicate that   students have used this dashboard for self-checking of learning task  completions, and the dashboard has served its purposes. A user  survey has been conducted and data are currently under analysis.   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   This work is partially supported by a Teaching Development Grant  from the University of Hong Kong.   6. REFERENCES  [1] Teaching and Learning. 2016. In The University of Hong   Kong: Teaching and Learning. Retrieved December 2, 2016,  from http://tl.hku.hk/tl/   [2] Ferguson, R. 2012. Learning analytics: drivers, developments  and challenges. International Journal of Technology  Enhanced Learning. 4, 5-6, 304-317.   [3] Siemens, G. 2010. What are Learning Analytics. Retrieved  November 29, 2016, from  http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/2010/08/25/what-are- learning-analytics/   [4] Elias, T. E. 2011. Learning Analytics: The Definitions, the  Processes, and the Potential. Retrieved December 1, 2016,  from  http://learninganalytics.net/LearningAnalyticsDefinitionsPro cessesPotential.pdf   http://tl.hku.hk/tl/ http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/2010/08/25/what-are-learning-analytics/ http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/2010/08/25/what-are-learning-analytics/ http://learninganalytics.net/LearningAnalyticsDefinitionsProcessesPotential.pdf http://learninganalytics.net/LearningAnalyticsDefinitionsProcessesPotential.pdf   