Workshop: Building the Learning Analytics Curriculum  Charles Lang Teachers College,  Columbia University 525 West 120th St New York, NY, USA  charles.lang@tc.columbia.edu  Stephanie Teasley School of Information University of Michigan  4322 North Quad 105 S. State St.  Ann Arbor, MI, USA steasley@umich.edu  John Stamper Human-Computer Interaction Institute  Carnegie Mellon University 5000 Forbes Avenue Pittsburgh, PA, USA  jstamper@cs.cmu.edu  ABSTRACT Learning Analytics courses and degree programs both on- and offline have begun to proliferate over the last three years. As a result of this growth in interest from students, univer- sity administrators, researchers and instructors we believe it is a good time to review how these educational efforts are impacting the field, how synergy between instructors might be developed to greater serve the field and what kinds of best practices could be developed.  CCS Concepts Social and professional topics  Information science education;  Keywords Learning analytics instruction, curriculum development, teaching  1. WORKSHOP BACKGROUND Learning Analytics courses and degree programs both on-  and offline have begun to proliferate over the last three years. Tens of thousands of students registered for online courses such as DALMOOC [6] and BDEMOOC [1], there has been considerable excitement around the growth of new degree programs such as the MSc in Learning Analytics at Teachers College, Columbia [7] and the strong analytics focus of the MSc in Digital Education at the University of Edinburgh [8], as well as an explosion of individual courses including those at the University of Michigan [3], The University of South Australia [5] and others. These efforts are building on the longstanding teaching of influential material at Carnegie Mellon University and the lasting success of the Learning Analytics Summer Institutes [2] as well as professionally- minded projects such as LACE [4]. As such, the growth of the field is clearly happening not just through research, but through the classroom.  Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).  LAK 17 Vancouver, Canada c 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).  ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03.  DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029439  We believe LAK17 is a good time to review how these edu- cational efforts are impacting the field of Learning Analytics, create a forum to discuss the unique challenges of teaching Learning Analytics and share best practices to strengthen educational offerings in the future.  1.1 Audience The audience for the workshop are those engaged in the  work of developing learning analytics curricula and program- ming, teaching learning analytics courses, administering learning analytics programs or otherwise interested in the professionalization of the field. Participants will be required to submit either a course description or curriculum. It is hoped that this workshop will develop a pooled curriculum that can aid the development of defining key content and skills within the field.  2. WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES The overall objectives of the workshop are to discuss prac-  tice and share resources for the formal teaching of Learning Analytics. This will be broken down into four key sections:  2.1 The Many Goals of LA Program Development  The goals of Learning Analytics programs and courses are many and varied. From providing an introduction to the field for the general public to training people for par- ticular roles within the burgeoning employment market for Learning Analysts (or whatever these individuals come to be called). The objective of this section of the workshop will be to consider and discuss the underlying purpose of learn- ing analytics programming at both the program and course level. This section of the program will focus on answering questions about how course offerings influence the field over- all, and how to balance the desires of different stakeholders such as employers, university administrators and researchers in defining the expertise that graduates should hold.  2.2 Course Content & Sequence The second objective of the workshop will be to discuss  and develop ideas around content and the sequence in which that content should be taught. We will work with participants to determine the level of consensus that ex- ists within the community about what content should be included within Learning Analytics programming and what the priorities are across different cultural, geographic, re- search paradigms and educational settings might be.    2.3 Sharing Tools & Resources The third aim of the workshop will be to demonstrate  useful tools and resources for teaching Learning Analytics. We plan to have an introduction to the use of data resources, out of the box analyses tools, Handbooks, and the pros- and cons- of various programming languages such as Python and R.  2.4 Incorporating LA Practice into Course Program Offerings  Possibly the most challenging part of teaching Learning Analytics is walking the talk, or in other words, think- ing through how to incorporate Learning Analytics into the courses we teach and programs we run. In many cases, the courses taught by researchers become the first attempts at observing learning analytics in the wild but whether this ad hoc approach can be systematized remains to be seen. Can we bake in a framework to teach Learning Analytics using Learning Analytics and how can this be achieved  2.5 Workshop Outcomes We intend outcomes for the workshop to be both commu-  nity oriented and tangible. The primary outcome will be to seed a community that can communicate about problems of practice around the teaching of Learning Analytics. The second will be to develop a greater understanding of this developing area by creating a catalogue of courses, and a repository of resources that can be a useful resource for the entire Learning Analytics Community.  2.6 Curricula Submissions A prerequisite of attendance is the submission of a brief  survey to aid the process of understanding the landscape of Learning Analytics teaching.  2.7 Resources We hope to both provide informative examples of resources  that participants can utilize, but also solicit resource exam- ples and how their pedagogical utility from participants. We hope to work towards creating a repository of confirmed ef- ficacious resources such as software, useful examples, data sets and lesson plans.  2.8 Best Practices We hope to push forward the conversation around strate-  gies to codify teaching practices. To develop an understand- ing amongst practitioners as to what works and what does not work with respect to teaching Learning Analytics. We hope that that this will develop a lasting conversation that can propel the field forward in the most effective, impact- ful and rigorous way. We have secured the input of several pioneers to speak about their work teaching this content in- cluding Carolyn Rose (Carnegie Mellon University), George Siemens (University of Texas, Arlington) and Ryan Baker (University of Pennsylvania).  3. REFERENCES [1] R. Baker. Big Data in Education, May 2015.  https://www.edx.org/course/big-data-education- teacherscollegex-bde1x.  [2] S. for Learning Analytics Research. LASI Learning Analytics Summer Institute, 2016. http://lasi.solaresearch.org/.  [3] T. McKay. Practical Learning Analytics, Aug. 2016. https://www.edx.org/course/practical-learning- analytics-michiganx-plax-0.  [4] L. Project. Learning Analytics Community Exchange, 2016. http://www.laceproject.eu/lace/.  [5] T. Rogers. Learning Analytics and Digital Learning, 2016. http://programs.unisa.edu.au/public/pcms/ course.aspxpageid=161021.  [6] G. Siemens, C. Rose, D. Gasevic, and R. Baker. Data, Analytics and Learning, June 2014. https://www.edx.org/course/data-analytics-learning- utarlingtonx-link5-10x.  [7] C. U. Teachers College. The Masters of Science Degree in Learning Analytics, 2015. https://www.tc.columbia.edu/human- development/learning-analytics/.  [8] T. U. o. E. The Moray House School of Education. Master of Science in Digital Education, 2015. http://digital.education.ed.ac.uk/.    