How can we accelerate dissemination of knowledge and  learning: Developing an online knowledge management   platform for Networked Improvement Communities  Ouajdi Manai   The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of  Teaching   51 Vista Ln, Stanford,   CA 94305 USA   +1(650) 566-5143  manai@carnegiefoundation.org   Hiroyuki Yamada  The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of   Teaching  51 Vista Ln, Stanford,    CA 94305 USA  +1(650) 566-5501   yamada@carnegiefoundation.org       ABSTRACT  The Networked Improvement Learning and Support (NILS)  platform is an online tool designed to accelerate the initiation and  development of Networked Improvement Communities in a  disciplined manner. Its main goal is to promote social,  organizational learning through curation and synthesis and tacit to  explicit knowledge conversion to facilitate knowledge  construction and ownership by the communities regarding  improvement practice in education. In this proposal we will  discuss the NILS platform, a few use cases, and a plan of analytics  development that advances knowledge dissemination and  monitors the health status of networks.       GENERAL TERMS   Knowledge Management Systems, Curation, Measurement,  Documentation, Performance, Dissemination, Social Pressure,  Human Factors, Improvement.   KEYWORDS   Networked Improvement Community, Improvement Science,  Behavior Modeling, Statistical Analysis, Social Network  Analysis, Recommender Engine, Machine Learning.   1. NETWORKED IMPROVEMENT  COMMUNITIES  In the past eight years the Carnegie Foundation for the  Advancement of Teaching has pioneered a fundamentally new  vision for the research and development enterprise in education.  In particular, the Carnegie Foundation seeks to join the discipline  of improvement science with the powerful capacities of networks  to foster innovation and social learning for education reform. This  approach is embodied in what we call Networked Improvement  Communities (NICs) [1]. NICs are scientific learning  communities distinguished by four essential characteristics: (a)  focused on a well specified common aim; (b) guided by a deep  understanding of the problem,  the system that produces it, and a  shared theory of practice improvement; (c) disciplined by the   rigor of improvement science; and (d) coordinated to accelerate  the development, testing and refinement of interventions, their  more rapid diffusion out into the field, and their effective  integration into varied educational contexts. Examples of NICs  are Carnegie Math Pathways that aims to improve outcomes of  students who placed into remedial math and Building a Teaching  Effectiveness Network that aims to improve the retention of  effective new teachers [1].   2. NETWORKED IMPROVEMENT  LEARNING AND SUPPORT (NILS)  PLATFORM  To accelerate improvement work by NICs, we have developed an  online platform for knowledge management called Networked  Improvement Learning and Support (NILS). This NILS platform  is designed to promote social, organizational learning and  disseminate tacit and explicit knowledge [2] for improvement in  education by moving much of what we currently do face-to-face  into a virtual learning environment. As we support NIC members  who seek to initiate, grow, and sustain their networks, we  recognize the need to assure that improvement efforts are  grounded analytically, tested empirically, and accelerated through  network-wide social learning, which requires front-line  practitioners to shift from consumers to producers of knowledge  that advances improvement practice. How can we assist them in  building improvement science habits and mind sets Accordingly,  we need a support infrastructure for documenting, capturing, and  organizing improvement knowledge for access and use throughout  widely distributed networks. The design and creation of such a  platform has become critical for the Foundation to advance  widespread use of the NIC as a social arrangement to accelerate  improvement work in the field of education.    The NILS platform is designed to accelerate the initiation and  development of NICs in a disciplined manner. The current landing  page shows driver diagrams NIC members are acting on and  remind them of their formulated theory of practice improvement.  The driver diagram provides a common, controlled language that  helps NIC members be on the same page toward a measurable  common aim with a set of hypotheses and actual change ideas for  actions to achieve the aim [1]. It also enables NIC members to  track Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycles with relevant data. The  PDSA cycle is a basic method of inquiry in improvement science  and can be used to turn ideas into action and connect action to  learning [1]. For both tools, the platform presents pictures of those  fellow members they collaborate with so as to promote group  solidarity and affinity and cultivate a sense of belonging to the     Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that  copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights  for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other  uses, contact the Owner/Author.   Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada  ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029451     networked community. It allows NIC members to comment on the  driver diagrams and PDSA cycles and create blogs. The NILS  platform provides space for dialogue and discussion and  emphasizes curation (e.g., tagging) and synthesis of information  presented as a means for NIC members constructing and owning a  body of knowledge for improvement practice together. It is  accessible via mobile devices as well as laptop and desktop PCs  and designed to be integrated into their current workflow with  ease of use (see Figure 1).     Figure 1. NILS Platform       3. PLAN OF ANALYTICS  As users utilize the NILS platform, the system automatically  collects user behavioral data as a form of click-stream data. Also,  production data will be available through PDSA cycles and  discussion boards. The third data source will be self-report  surveys. By leveraging machine learning techniques [3], we plan  to analyze these data in order to examine how change ideas evolve  over time as a consequence of interactions among NIC members,  and more particularly, to identify what types of interactions  involving what levels or groups of NIC members contribute most  to this evolution. This analysis of interactive patterns serving to  evolve change ideas can contribute to informing users of the best  practices in knowledge and learning dissemination. We plan to  develop a recommendation engine to notify users of which  group(s) in the NIC is currently working on similar issues and  suggest the users contact them to learn from their practice. This  may be particularly useful for those who struggle for  implementing change ideas and seemingly need support from the  outside. From social network standpoints [4], we will identify  what we call informal leaders who are, for example, active in  executing change ideas and leverage them for further knowledge  dissemination. At the same time we are interested in any social,  cultural norms that may develop over time in NICs, which may  facilitate or inhibit knowledge dissemination. Related to this, we  want to examine any shift in user mindset and habits regarding  improvement science as a NIC member. Our analysis also focuses   on the status of health or sustainability of the NIC and the  development of a relevant analytics dashboard.    4. USE CASE  We expect a few use cases of the NILS platform from two NICs.  The Carnegie Foundation and the Tennessee State Department of  Education engaged in a partnership to initiate the Tennessee Early  Literacy Network, which seeks to improve outcomes in K-3  literacy. The goals of the partnership are to (a) develop a network  charter to improve third-grade literacy, (b) support the initiation of  NICs across the state, (c) develop improvement science and  network expertise at the state, regional, and district levels, and (d)  provide analytics and research in support of the health and vitality  of the network.   Carnegie Math Pathways NIC employs a systemic approach that  includes a comprehensive set of innovations in curriculum,  pedagogy, social and emotional supports, course structure,  analytics, and faculty professional development in order to  improve remedial math education. While the curriculum materials  provide critical just-in-time support for teaching, they are only  one part of the set of changes that generate the incredibly positive  results we see across the country, more than doubling success  rates in half the time to attaining college math credit [1]. The  Pathways programs are not textbooks or curricula that remain  static; rather, the programs are developed by and for a community  of practitioners with researchers, content experts, and Carnegie  Foundation staff as a NIC.   5. CONTRIBUTION TO THE FIELD  We will present our developmental work on the NILS platform.   From our presentation, the field will be able to learn patterns of  knowledge dissemination and evolution, any shifts in users  mindset and habits, analytic techniques to identify those patterns,  as well as data visualizations informative to NIC members from  different levels in the community.     6. REFERENCES  [1] Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., Grunow, A., & LeMahieu, P. G.   (2015). Learning to improve: How America's schools can get  better at getting better. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education  Press.   [2] Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating  company: How Japanese companies create the dynamics of  innovation. New York, NY: Oxford University Press   [3] Murphy, K. P. (2012). Machine learning: A probabilistic  perspective. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.   [4]  Laat, M. De, Lally, V., Lipponen, L., & Simons, R. J.  (2007). Investigating patterns of interaction in networked  learning and computer-supported collaborative learning: A  role for Social Network Analysis. International Journal of  Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 87-103                      