Dynamics of MOOC Discussion Forums  Mina Shirvani Boroujeni CHILI Group, EPFL, RLCD, Station 20  1015, Lausanne, Switzerland mina.shirvaniboroujeni@epfl.ch  Tobias Hecking COLLIDE group,University of Duisburg-Essen  47048 Duisburg, Germany hecking@collide.info  H. Ulrich Hoppe COLLIDE group,University of Duisburg-Essen  47048 Duisburg, Germany hoppe@collide.info  Pierre Dillenbourg CHILI Group, EPFL, RLCD, Station 20  1015, Lausanne, Switzerland pierre.dillenbourg@epfl.ch  ABSTRACT In this integrated study of dynamics in MOOCs discussion forums, we analyze the interplay of temporal patterns, dis- cussion content, and the social structure emerging from the communication using mixed methods. A special focus is on the yet under-explored aspect of time dynamics and influ- ence of the course structure on forum participation. Our analyses show dependencies between the course structure (video opening time and assignment deadlines) and the over- all forum activity whereas such a clear link could only be partially observed considering the discussion content. For analyzing the social dimension we apply role modeling tech- niques from social network analysis. While the types of user roles based on connection patterns are relatively stable over time, the high fluctuation of active contributors lead to fre- quent changes from active to passive roles during the course. However, while most users do not create many social connec- tions they can play an important role in the content dimen- sion triggering discussions on the course subject. Finally, we show that forum activity level can be predicted one week in advance based on the course structure, forum activity history and attributes of the communication network which enables identification of periods when increased tutor sup- ports in the forum is necessary.  Categories and Subject Descriptors K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: collaborative learning; H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human Fac- tors  Keywords Massive open online courses, MOOCs, Discussion forum, So- cial network, Temporal analysis, Content analysis  1. INTRODUCTION  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita- tion on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re- publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.  LAK 17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada c 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. . . $15.00  DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027391  Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) offer high qual- ity education provided by domain experts of various sub- jects to a massive number of participants with very different backgrounds and constraints. Thereby, flexibility in plan- ning and organizing learning activities is often considered as one of the main benefits offered by MOOCs [17]. Re- cently, importance of time factor in MOOCs analysis has been highlighted in several studies [7, 4, 3]. The timing of learning activities is a key issue in any educational situa- tion, and it is even more critical in MOOCs, where different time structures have affordances and constraints [7]. In [3] timing of learners activities over different weekdays and dif- ferent times of the day and its relation to external factors such as employment status has been explored. Moreover, in a recent work shirvani et al. [4] proposed quantitative meth- ods for analyzing the timing patterns of learners activities and measuring the regularity level of students in terms of following a particular weekly study plan.  Furthermore, social learning is considered an important element of scalable education in MOOCs [5] and the po- tential to establish collaboration on massive scale has been argued. However, in most MOOCs, with their lack of indi- vidual support for students by tutors, discussion forums are the only channel for support and for information exchange between peers. Many studies point out limitations of discus- sion forums such as low overall participation [15, 19], and sometimes a lack of responsiveness [30]. Consequently, there is a discrepancy between the goal of establishing a learning community and the actual implementation of collaboration mechanisms. Given this, it has been argued that collab- oration in MOOCs under consideration of the limitations of asynchronous communication and heterogeneous popula- tion of participants has to be much better supported [22, 33]. This includes personalization, support in finding peers for information exchange, and formation of learning groups [22].  In order to foster the development of sophisticated sup- port mechanisms for peer exchange, a deep understanding of the current situation and learners interactions within the discussion forums is inevitable. For this reason, analyses of MOOCs discussion forums have received much attention in recent years. Previous studies in the literature have inves- tigated discussion forums from different perspectives such as learners engagement and activities [15, 19, 1], discussion themes and topics or linguistic properties of written mes- sages [28, 23, 16], structure of the communication network,    group formation and social interactions among forum par- ticipants [9, 10, 18]. A detailed overview of previous works on forum analysis is presented in section 2.  The goal of this work is to extend this body of research by providing an integrated study on all the mentioned aspects combining different analysis methods. Moreover, consider- ing the importance of time in online discussions, a particular focus in this paper is on dynamics and temporal patterns. Time dynamics are often neglected by existing works which consider aggregated variables over time to describe forum communications. In particular this work covers three main dimensions of discussion forums: Time, content and social. In time dimension we consider daily timeline of course duration with the main course related events, namely video openning time and assignment deadlines, and track the evo- lution of forum activity with respect to the course timeline. In content dimension, we investigate the topics of forum discussions and in social dimension, we study the un- derlying social structure of discussion forums (global level) and learners roles in the communication network (individ- ual level). By contrasting the results of these analyses in- sights on the interrelation between forum activity, discussion content, and social communication structure can be shown. Concerning the aforementioned aspects we aim to answer the following research questions:   RQ1. How does the overall activity in discussion fo- rums evolve over time and is it influenced by course structure [time dimension]   RQ2. How do the discussion topics evolve over time and is it related to the course structure [content + time dimension]   RQ3. Does the course structure influence the struc- ture of information exchange network [social + time dimension]   RQ4. How do the students structural roles in discus- sion forum evolve over time [social + time dimension]   RQ5. How are the students structural roles in the communication network related to discussion content [content + social dimension]   RQ6. Is the overall forum activity predictable  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work and section 3 present the dataset. In Section 4 overall forum activity across course timeline is investigated (RQ1 ) Section 5 explores the dynamics of dis- cussion topics (RQ2 ). In section 6 dynamics of social com- munication structure at global (RQ3 ) and individual level (RQ4 ) is being explored. Section 7 investigates the relation between social and content aspects (RQ5 ). In section 8, extracted features from several of previous sections are inte- grated into a machine learning model to predict the forum activity level (RQ6 ). Section 9 provides a comprehensive discussion of results and concludes the paper.  2. RELATED WORK Existing studies on discussion forum analysis focus on dif-  ferent aspects such as users activity, produced content, and social structure. The question how engaged different MOOC users are in discussion forums was addressed in various stud- ies. The fact that the discussion forums are commonly used only by a small fraction of the course participants [15] is  meanwhile commonly known. Furthermore, the fraction of users who use the forums intensively is even smaller [19] and discussion volume often represents a continuous declines over the duration of the course [5]. These findings contra- dict the intention of discussion forums to foster collaborative knowledge building between course participants from vari- ous knowledge backgrounds [24]. On the other hand there is evidence for a relation between engagement in discussion fo- rums and different styles of engagement with respect to other course activities [1] and that forum activity goes along with completion rates [1, 9]. Forum participation features have also been employed to predict performance and engagement in the course [20, 31].  Apart from questions about the activity of course partic- ipants in the discussion forum the actual content of the dis- cussions is of interest as well. This typically requires natural language processing to analyse the textual contributions of forum users. The types and themes of discussion forums can be very diverse and are not necessarily related to the actual course subject [19], for example, non-course subject related discussions like search for learning groups or personal intro- ductions, technical and organisational support. Since col- laborative knowledge building and information exchange is of great interest Wise and Cui [28] proposed content-based indicators for subject related discussions. Similarly, Rossi et al. [23] build supervised classifiers to predict the type of discussion of forum threads. Another strand in content- based analysis is concerned with the nature of forum posts. Classification of speech-acts in MOOC discussion forums [2, 16], such as questions, answers or issue resolution, provides insights into the composition of discussion forum from the perspective of contribution types. Apart from speech acts, contributions can also be classified according to constructs of conceptual and operational learning levels according to the Anderson and Krathwohls taxonomy [29].  In the aspect of the social and communication structures emerging from interaction in course forums, social network analysis is applied to networks of interconnected forum users to investigate structural patterns and the underlying rela- tional organisation of a course community. Gillani et al. [9, 10] analyzed networks of forum users connected by co- contribution to the same discussion threads. They argue that the coherence of the social structure mainly depends on a small set of central users and the forum users can be rather be considered as a loosely connected crowd rather than a strongly connected learning community. These difference between regular forum users and occasional posters was ex- plicitly taken into account by Poquet and Dawson [18] show- ing that regular users shape a denser and more centralised communication network since they have more opportunities to establish connections. In the context of structural analy- sis of forum communication networks, different studies used exponential random graph models (ERGMs) [21] or related statistical network analysis models to identify factors that influence the emergence of the observed network character- istics [18, 13, 32, 14]. In general these results reveal an effect of reciprocated ties and a lack of centralization of the net- works to few influential users. On the level of individuals, social network analysis is further applied to identify different roles of users based on their social connections and thematic affiliations [12, 11]. This will be explicitly taken up in this work later on in Section 6.    Figure 1: Number of message per day in Scala.  3. DATASET The dataset used in this study comprises of two engineer-  ing MOOCs offered by Coursera entitled: Functional Pro- gramming Principles in Scala and Principles of Reactive Programming. Hereafter referred to as Scala and Reactive. Both courses were eight weeks long and videos were released in a weekly basis. The final grade was based on a weighted average of six assignments corresponding to different weeks and passing grade was 60 out of 100. Discussion forums in both courses were structured several into sub-forum such as general discussions, search for learning group, questions and clarifications about course lectures and assignments. We re- stricted our analysis to lectures and assignments sub-forums as our focus is in tracking the evolution of discussions related to the course content. This resulted in 7,699 messages (posts or comments) by 1,175 different participants in 939 threads for Scala course and 12,283 messages by 1,902 participants in 1,702 threads in Reactive course.  4. FORUM ACTIVITY OVER TIME To investigate the time dynamics of forum activity and  its relation with the course structure (RQ1), we extracted number of messages (posts or comments), number of forum contributors (participants who wrote a message) and num- ber of threads added to the content forums on each day. As an example, Figure 1 represents daily count of messages in the discussion forum in Scala MOOCs with respect to main course events: video release (dashed blue lines) and assign- ment deadlines (solid red lines). Contributors and threads charts follow a similar trend. As it can be perceived from the charts, despite the decline of forum activity over time, at several points close to the video release or assignment deadlines there is an increment of messages in the discus- sion forum. This is better perceived from Figure 2 reflecting that the highest level of forum activity is associated with two to three days after the video release and activity level declines afterwards. Considering the proximity assignment deadlines, as represented in Figure 2b, the forum activity level increases as the deadline approaches. These observa- tions further confirm the dependency between course struc- ture and forum activity level suggesting that forum activity is a function of the weekly course structure.  5. DISCUSSION CONTENT OVER TIME With respect to our research question on how the content  of discussion forum evolves during the outline of the course (RQ2), in the following we present an in-depth analysis con- sidering the posts content over time.  5.1 Method  (a) (b)  Figure 2: Average number of new messages depend- ing on the proximity to video release (a) and assign- ment deadline (b) in Scala.  To investigate the discussion content over time [RQ2], we compute the distributions of certain indicator phrases over time to investigate potential relations with the course events. Table 1 gives an overview of the used indicator phrases. The set of subject related keywords was created specifically for each course. First, the most frequent concepts in the discussion threads were determined using the Open Calais API1. This initial set of keywords was then manually refined based on the course outlines and detailed knowledge about the course topics (e.g. common concepts and tools in func- tional and reactive programming). Different spellings and synonyms were explicitly taken into account, for example, lambda function and anonymous function were mapped to the same concept. This resulted in a set of 25 subject related keywords for Scala and 19 for Reactive. In addition to subject related keywords that can directly be mapped to specific course topics, we can also identify terms that are of general nature but indicate content related discourse. These general content related keywords can appear without mentioning specific domain concepts (e.g. I have no idea how to approach this problem. Can someone clarify ), or they can be used in combination with domain terms (e.g. Is there a difference between a lambda and an anonymous func- tion). Such keywords as difference between have been characterised by Daems et al. [6] as signal concepts. Our overall distinction between types of indicators for certain categories of contributions has also been inspired by Wise and Cuis findings on the identification of forum threads related to the course content using indicator phrases [28]. Additionally, we also identify resource related keywords mentioning course material, i.e. videos and assignments as well as posts containing hyperlinks to other resources. Fi- nally, since both of the courses analysed in this study are concerned with programming, technical posts which con- tain source code or error messages are identified based on <code> or <error> tags in the post markup.  5.2 Results  5.2.1 Course related posts over time The ratio of posts containing general content related indi-  cator phrases and mentions of course resources for each day in Scala can be seen in Figure 3. For the Reactive course there is a similar pattern so we do not report these diagrams for space reasons. In general, one can see that content re-  1http://www.opencalais.com/opencalais-api/    Table 1: Examples of indicator phrases used to track discussion topics over time  Subject related keywords Keywords related to the main course topics.  General content related keywords dont understand, difference, no idea, solution, feed- back, clarify, grade, question, answer, example  Resource related keywords video/lecture, assignment/quiz, submission, post con- tains a hyperlink  Technical content Post contains source code, Post contains an error mes- sage  Figure 3: Genereal content, technical, and resource related keywords over time (days) in Scala  lated discussions are not strongly influenced by the course structure. Moreover, content is discussed throughout the en- tire period of the course. However, regarding the mentions of lecture videos and assignments (resource related keywords) there is often an increase short after video releases indicating that a new video is directly discussed after release.  5.2.2 Subject related discussions over time As reported above general course content related  keyphrases do not show a strong pattern that can be re- lated to the course structure. Apart from the the occur- rence of general content related keywords (c.f. Table 1), Figure 4 gives concrete examples for the occurrence terms in forum posts that specifically relate to the course subject of Reactive course (Same patterns could be identified for Scala). Certain terms cannot be definitely related to course events. This suggest that some participants of the MOOC have a certain background knowledge when they join the course, and thus, are able to discuss important concepts independently from the conveyed knowledge in the lecture videos. On the contrary there are terms that are discussed much more extensively after a video release. In given exam- ple of the Reactive course, terms like promise or mentions of the akka reactive programming framework are clearly introduced by the corresponding lecture videos. Interest- ingly the lecture introduced concepts remain in the discus- sion until the end of the course indicating that the discussion  Figure 4: Examples for subject related keyphrases in Reactive  forums are to some extent useful for further discussion of lec- ture introduced knowledge that can be connected with the following course sections.  6. SOCIAL COMMUNICATION STRUC- TURE  In this section we explore the social aspect of discussion forum and investigate the network of information exchange among forum contributors. In particular we study the infor- mation exchange network at two levels: global and individ- ual. At the global level we explore the evolution of network over time (section 6.2.1), whereas at the individual level we focus on students roles in the network (section 6.2.2).  6.1 Methods  6.1.1 Network extraction In related work there are several approaches to model so-  cial networks from forum communication. The most simple approach is to build an undirected network by linking all fo- rum users who contribute to the same discussion threads as in [10]. Another approach is to build reply networks where users who write in a discussion thread are linked to the thread initiator by directed outgoing relations [14]. However, since we are interested in the concrete informa- tion exchange relations between course participants a more complex network extraction method introduced in [12] was applied. This method incorporates three steps: (1) Classifi- cation of forum posts into three classes information giving, information seeking, and others using supervised classi- fication models (bagged random forests). The models were trained on a set of 200 hand classified posts, where all posts that request information, for example, concrete questions on course topics or asking for advice are coded as informa- tion seeking. Posts that provide any kind of information to information seekers are subsumed as information giving. Posts classified as others cannot be associated to any of the other classes. As reported in [12] the accuracy of the classification model is considerable (F1=0.77). (2) Extrac- tion of relations between posts. After deletion of all other posts, discussion thread (or a sub-thread comprising of com- ments to a parent post) can be decomposed into sequences    of information seeking posts followed by sequences of in- formation giving posts. In this sense a thread is considered as a sequence of alternating information seeking sequences and information giving sequences. In the most usual case, posts of information giving sequence refer to the most re- cent information seeking sequence. This allows to extract a network of posts. Since the time when forum posts was made is available, an edge between two post nodes carry a timestamp indicating when it was created. (3) The fi- nal information exchange network is derived by collapsing all nodes of the post network from step (2) with the same author into a single node. In this network there exist a di- rected edge between two nodes (representing forum users) if the first user provided some information to the second user. For more details about the network extraction process we refer to [12].  Based on the timestamps of the edges, the resulting net- work can be divided into a sequence of time slices corre- sponding to certain time window. Each time slice contains all the nodes (forum users) but only the edges that where present in the corresponding time window. This allows to study the dynamics of the social communication structure in detail, as it will be explained in the following.  6.1.2 Network structure over time In order to study the temporal dynamics of network, we  consider network slices over one week periods using a sliding window approach. This results in one network slice for each day of the course (d > 6) corresponding to the forum activity during the past seven days ([d  6 : d]). For each network slice a set of classic structural attributes were then com- puted, including number of nodes and edges, average node degree2, network density3, average path length4, diameter5  and global clustering coefficient6.  6.1.3 Role modeling Role modeling in social network analysis is often referred  to as positional analysis [26], where the position of a node is determined by its connection patterns to other nodes. Blockmodeling [8] is a technique to decompose the set of nodes of a network into clusters of nodes with (almost) equivalent connection patterns. In network science those clusters are interpreted as users who have similar roles or positions in the community, hereby referred to as structural roles. Various notions of equivalence can be used for clus- tering the nodes. The most common are structural equiva- lence and regular equivalence. While structural equivalence between two nodes requires that the nodes have exactly the same neighbours, regular equivalence relaxes this strict cri- terion such that equivalent nodes should have connections to nodes that are equivalent themselves. This recursive defini- tion of regular equivalence can easily be understood as color- ing the nodes of a network such that nodes that are equiva-  2average number of connections that a node has to other nodes 3ratio of the number of edges and the number of possible edges 4average number of steps along the shortest paths for all possible pairs of connected nodes 5length of the longest shortest path (geodesic distance) be- tween each two nodes 6Fraction of closed triangles (cliques of three) and possible triangles  Figure 5: Core-periphery role structure  lent have the same color, and nodes of the same color receive edges from the same set of colors and point to nodes of ex- actly the same set of colors. We refer the interested reader to [8] for mathematical details. Clustering of nodes according to structural and regular equivalences implies some interest- ing characteristics regarding the possible relations between the clusters. In a perfect structural equivalence clustering all relations between each pair of clusters c1 and c2 are ei- ther complete (all nodes in c1 point to all nodes in c2), or non-existent (there are no relations between nodes in c1 and c2). In the less strict notion of regular equivalence all nodes in c1 point to at least one node in c2 and all nodes in c2 receive arcs from at least on node in c1. In the case of com- munication networks such as the ones extracted from the discussion forums regular equivalence clustering are more reasonable because the requirement of structural equivalence is too strict for sparse networks and would result in many very small clusters. Furthermore, instead of perfect regular equivalence an approximate notion of regular similarity is used in conjunction with hierarchical clustering.  A blockmodel depicts clusters of nodes and the relational patterns between these clusters, and thus, reduces the possi- bly very complex social network into an interpretable macro structure. This allows for uncovering the inherent organ- isation of a network, such as hierarchical communication structures having nodes assigned to different levels, or core- periphery structures. In this study the core-periphery pat- tern based on regular similarity of nodes is of particular importance. While related works report that the overall forum communication network in MOOCs resemble a core- periphery structure [12, 14], we discovered that this is also the case for each time slice of the evolving forum communi- cation network of the investigated courses.  Figure 5 depicts a typical core-periphery role structure that can be found in communication networks. There are four roles (clusters) represented as nodes and connections between them. The core users form a cohesive subgroup in the sense that they have many communication relations within their cluster. Furthermore, there are two peripheral roles that are not cohesive but are connected to other clus- ters. These two peripheral roles can be characterized as help givers (HG) or help seekers (HS) respectively since they have mainly outgoing or ingoing relations. There is also a fourth role inactive/isolated, which comprises all users who do not have any connections to others in a particular time slice. This can have two reasons, either they were not active during the time span for which the model was created (inactive) or their posts could not be linked to other posts (isolated), for example, a help-seeking post without replies or posts not related to information exchange (Section 6.1.1).  Later on in Section 6.2.2 a core-periphery blockmodel is    derived from each time slice of the evolving information ex- change network representing the role structure in different periods of the course and used to investigate role changes of course participants over time.  6.2 Results  6.2.1 Evolution of network structure over time Considering our research question on the evolution of net-  works structure (RQ3), based on the trends observed in section 4, we hypothesize that course schedule influences discussion forum network structure. For instance with the increment of contributors and messages in the forum close to the video release or assignment deadlines, new nodes or edges could appear in the network influencing the network size, degree, density or other attributes.  Figure 6 for Scala is representative for the evolution of network attributes over weekly network slices (extracted us- ing sliding window as described in section 6.1.2) for both courses. The overall decrease of forum activity towards the end of the course is also reflected by network size metrics (nodes and edges count). The networks are very sparse since the low average degree in relation to the network size results in a low density (< 0.02). Despite the compara- tively larger network size in Reactive, in both courses aver- age path length are relatively small (< 3 in Scala and < 6 in Reactive) throughout the course. Short path length though sparsity of the connections are a typical property of small- world networks [27] but in contrast to classical small-world network models the clustering coefficient is low. This indi- cates that the communication structure does not evolve into densely connected communities but rather into sparse parts interconnected via a few highly connected nodes.  On contrary to our hypothesis, course events do not show any direct influence on the network structure. One plau- sible explanation could be the structural limitations of the communication network such as the absence of persistent discussion groups throughout the course duration, which is also pointed out in previous studies such as [18] and [9]. Moreover, the increase of messages count in the discussion forum in a particular period of time, could be resulting from a sequence of information exchange messages between few students, which would not add new edges or nodes to the network. Since an edge in the networks aggregates possi- bly multiple communication events between a pair of users, such message sequences would not be reflected in the net- work structure.  6.2.2 Structural roles over time To track the evolution of individuals structural role in the  discussion forum (RQ4), we consider successive bi-weekly slices of the network described in section 6.1.1 and extract the macro structure of each network slice as described in section 6.1.3. The resulting role models for all four time slices in both courses follow the same structure as in Figure 5. Based on the resulting role models, we then construct se- quence of roles for each individual over the four time slices (phases). Additionally in each phase we differentiate late- comers or drop-outs from students who follow the course but have no contribution in the information exchange net- work. This results in a fifth role in sequences which we refer to as course inactive. Figure 7 show role sequences of fo- rum participants in both courses. In the sequence charts,  Figure 6: Network attributes over time (Scala)  (a) Scala (b) Reactive  Figure 7: Role sequences of forum participants  each horizontal line corresponds to role sequence of a par- ticular participant over the four biweekly phases. According to Figure 7, in both courses students are often active only in one or two phases and instances of active forum partici- pation throughout the course are quite rare. Furthermore, a considerable portion of active students in each phase are new users (i.e. for the first time have a role different from inactive/isolated), which could also imply that persistent discussion groups in the forum are not very common.  Next, to identify common patterns in structural role se- quences, we clustered role sequences using hierarchical clus- tering method with optimal matching as distance metric and substitution costs determined based on transition probabili- ties between states [25]. Number of clusters was determined based on the resulting dendograms.  Figure 8 and 9 represent the resulting clusters of role se- quences for both courses. As it can be inferred from the figures, clusters in both courses can be characterized as one time help seekers (cluster 1, N = 273 in Scala and N = 752 in Reactive), one time help givers (cluster 2, N = 383 in Scala and N = 276 in Reactive), active forum participants    Figure 8: Clusters of role sequences (Scala).  (cluster 3, N = 123 in Scala and N = 160 in Reactive) or dropouts (cluster 4, N = 124 in Scala and N = 303 in Reactive). The first cluster in Reactive course is slightly different from Scala, as it includes one time help seekers and also some help givers.  Comparison of average grade obtained by each cluster of participants (Figure 10) reveals that in in both courses, one time help seekers have significantly lower grades compared to one time help givers (77 vs 86, F [1, 1] = 23.29, p < 0.001 in Scala, 86 vs. 92, F [1, 1] = 0.2, p = 0.002 in Reactive). Additionally, despite the fact that one time help givers have lower forum participation compared to active participants, both groups achieve comparably high scores (86 and 88 in Scala, 92 in Reactive). One possible interpretation could be that active forum participants in this course, take advantage of discussion forum to advance their knowledge and resolve difficulties with respect to the course materials, whereas one time help givers are students with higher expertise level who only occasionally participate in the discussion forum, and when they do so, they provide answers to questions asked by other participants.  7. SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND DISCUS- SION CONTENT  For the sake of investigating the relation between social structure and content (RQ5), in the following results of the previous section 6.2.2 are combined with the content analy- sis reported in Section 5. Tables 2 and 3 give statistics on the content of the posts made per user in the four different role sequence clusters (c.f. Section 6.2.2). Note that one post can contain keywords of different types. There is a sig- nificant relation between the different role sequence clusters and the distributions of different post types (chi2 = 19.29, p = 0.02 in Scala, chi2 = 27.71, p = 0.001 in Reactive). Especially for the Scala course, it is interesting to note that one time help seekers, in comparison to the other groups, have relatively more posts mentioning course subject key- words or posts containing general content related phrases.  Figure 9: Clusters of role sequences (Reactive)  (a) Scala (b) Reactive  Figure 10: Average grades for clusters role se- quences  Furthermore, in both courses these types of user have more technical posts and mention course resources more often. This finding is not obvious and gives interesting insights into the characteristics of forum users who are engaged in discus- sions in a limited time span. While related works suggest that the structural coherence of the forum communication mainly depends on the small set of very active users [10, 19], the content analysis of the posts shows that the other users can also have an important impact on the discourse by triggering focused discussions on specific subject areas and mentioning concrete problems.  8. PREDICTING FORUM ACTIVITY LEVEL  In order to predict the overall forum activity (RQ6) we trained three predictive models for number of new threads, messages and forum contributors on each day of the course.  8.1 Method Table 4 provides an overview of the features considered in  the predictive models. In particular three categories of fea- tures were extracted for each course day (d): previous forum activity, structural features and network features. Previous    Table 2: Number of keywords in posts per user by structural role clusters for Scala.  Cluster Subject General content  TechnicalResource #Posts  One time help seekers  0.74 0.26 0.15 0.25 1148  One time help givers  0.59 0.23 0.12 0.22 1284  Active par- ticipants  0.65 0.21 0.16 0.23 2978  Dropouts 0.67 0.22 0.14 0.19 504  Table 3: Number of keywords in posts per user by structural role clusters for Reactive.  Cluster Subject General content  TechnicalResource #Posts  One time help seekers  0.59 0.21 0.11 0.23 3405  One time help givers  0.59 0.2 0.08 0.22 1601  Active par- ticipants  0.56 0.21 0.08 0.22 4534  Dropouts 0.56 0.18 0.08 0.22 1947  forum activity features encode the volume and intensity of forum activity on each day and on the previous days. For instance T0 represents count of threads created on the cur- rent day (d) and Tk>0 reflects the number of new threads on k days before. Structural features describe the properties of a day, related to the course structure such as time after video release or time before assignment deadlines. Network features describe the attributes of the network slice on k days before the current day (See section 6.1.2 for details on network partitioning and features description).  Additionally we consider a forth category of features de- scribing the initial forum activity level, during the first week of the course. Such features could act as a normaliza- tion factor to compensate the difference in intrinsic popu- larity of discussion forums in different MOOCs.  Using the described features, we built three regression models for estimating number of forum threads (T0), mes- sages (M0) and contributors (C0) on a day. Several machine learning methods such as support vector regression models (SVR) with linear and RBF7 kernels, random forests and neural networks were applied for training the models. Data from Scala and Reactive courses was randomly partitioned into train (70%) and test (30%) sets and 10-fold cross val- idation was used to tune the models parameters. Highly correlated (r > 0.7) and linearly dependant features were removed from the features set prior to model training.  8.2 Results In all cases SVR with linear kernels resulted in smallest  prediction error, reported in Table 5. Predictive models cap- ture 81% to 83% variance of the dependant variable and pro- vide quite accurate predictions as reflected by low values of normalized root-mean-square errors (NRMSE) on the test data. Based on the analysis of the variable importance in the obtained models the first six features include count and  7radial basis function  Table 4: Description of features for each day Previous forum activity  Tk number of new threads initiated on day d k. Mk number of new messages created on day d k. Ck number of forum contributors on day d k. TMk mean time between successive forum writing events TTk mean time between successive thread initiating  events Structural features  Dv number of days after the latest video release. Da number of days after the latest assignment release. Dd number of days left to the next assignment dead-  line. Dr ratio of the current day (d) to the course length  encoding what percentage of the course is passed. Na number of assignments open for submission.  Network features Netk network features on day dk, including nodes and  edges count, diameter, average degree, path length and clustering coefficient  Initial forum activity (first week) W1T mean and standard deviation of threads count per  day, mean time between new threads (3 features) W1M mean and standard deviation of messages count  per day, mean time between messages (3 features) W1C mean and standard deviation of forum contributors  per day (2 features)  average time between previous forum activity, ratio of the passed course length (Dr), number of days after latest video release (Dv), average network degree on previous days and number of open assignments (Na). Proposed models are capable of predicting the forum activity level one week in advance as forum activity history and network features in- cluded in the models correspond to seven days before the prediction day (k = 7). This information provided to the teaching team, could enable them to prepare the logistics to efficiently support students in discussion forums, mainly during the high activity periods.  Table 5: Overview of predictive models and results DV Features R2  (train) NRMSE  (train) NRMSE (test)  T0 Prev, Struct, W1T , Net7 0.81 0.40 0.28 M0 Prev, Struct, W1M , Net7 0.80 0.27 0.23 C0 Prev, Struct, W1C, Net7 0.83 0.27 0.22 Normalized RMSE by mean of observed values  9. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION In this work we applied mixed methods to investigate the  forum communication in two MOOCs in the time, content, and social dimension leading to insights regarding the re- search questions formulated in the beginning (Section 1).  In the time dimension, in Section 4 we investigated how the outline of the courses (video release and assignment deadlines) influences the overall forum activity (RQ1). We could observe an increase of the number of posts before dead- lines and after video release days, and thus conclude that course events have an impact on the forum communication.    Surprisingly, based on the content analysis of the posts over time (RQ2), there was no clear coupling between the course structure and quantity of general content related, re- source related, and technical posts as reported in section 5. However, mentions of some specific terms regarding the course subject tend to increase after video releases indicat- ing that some discussion topics are introduced by the course while others are brought into discussion by the participants themselves.  The temporal dynamic of the social structure emerging from the forum communication with respect to course events (RQ3) was analyzed in Section 6.2.1. Here we could show that the global organisation (network characteristics) of the communication network is independent of the course struc- ture. One reason can be the absence of a sustainable forum community and the high fluctuation of the active contribu- tors. Consequently, there is no inherent self-organisation of the network, which would require coordination and mainte- nance of social relations. This further supports the claim of Gillani and Eynon [9] that MOOC forums resemble decen- tralized crowd behaviour rather than a social community.  A more user centric perspective on the integrated analy- sis of the time and the social dimension was taken in sec- tion 6.2.2 to answer research question on how roles of forum users evolve (RQ4). Interestingly, the role structure of the information exchange network comprising of a small cohe- sive core of active contributors, and peripheral help-giving or help-seeking users that has also been reported for static snapshots of the network in [12] and [14], persist over sev- eral time slices. While the overall structural organisation of the networks is stable it could be shown that the associa- tion of users to roles changes drastically over time. Only a small subset of the most active (core) users retain an active role over time, and majority of learners are active in only very few (mostly one) time slice. It could be seen that the fluctuation of active users is so pervasive such that in each time slice even the majority of users are newcomers in the sense that they form connections to other users for the first time. This can be considered as a major obstacle for the emergence of a sustainable community and further explains the irregularities in the overall network structure mentioned above.  Regarding research question on the relation between stu- dents roles in the communication network and discussion topics (RQ5), in section 7 the combination of structural role models and discussion content was investigated. Re- sults showed that even if peripheral users (one time help- givers and seekers) are genrerally not as important for the structural cohesion of the communication network as the core users, they make fewer but important contributions in- dicated by their high rates of general content related and course subject related posts. Especially the participants in the group of occasional (or one-time) help-seekers post similar or even more information requests related to course content, technical issues including source code, or mentions of concrete course materials. Consequently those users can often be notable as initiators of discussions even if their ac- tivity is limited.  The question about the predictability of forum activity (RQ6) was answered in section 8. It could be shown that the forum activity level in terms of the number of discussion threads, messages and participants is predictable one week in advance given the course structure (video and assignment  dates), history of forum activity and the described network features. Further, the predictive models can be considered as a building block for teaching support tools to forecast periods when increased tutor support for forum discussions is needed.  In summary, while the majority of research works focus- ing on single aspects of on MOOC discussion forums point to the conclusion that the current implementation of discus- sion forums are only used intensively by a small amount of course participants, and further, only a subset of the discus- sions are relevant for the information exchange, the outcome of our study suggests that discussion forums are much more complex. Activity, content, and structural related analyses highlight different aspects of forum communication, while there are several interdependencies between the progress of the course, the contributed content and structural roles of participants that have to be taken into account to get a clearer picture and to foster the development of future col- laboration support. Recommendation mechanisms to find the right information and adequate discussion partners [22, 30] can be one initial step, but in order to transform the loosely connected crowd of forum users into a sustainable community in the sense of social learning requires also sup- port for maintaining social contacts. Furthermore, combina- tion of predictive models proposed in section 8 with content analysis of the forum contributions can potentially support instructors to turn their attention to upcoming important discussions and enable interventions and community man- agement.  10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This study is part of the leading house DUAL-T research  project funded by the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI).  11. REFERENCES [1] A. Anderson, D. Huttenlocher, J. Kleinberg, and  J. Leskovec. Engaging with massive online courses. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW14, pages 687698. ACM, 2014.  [2] J. Arguello and K. Shaffer. Predicting speech acts in mooc forum posts. In Proceedings of the 9th International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, ICWSM15, 2015.  [3] M. S. Boroujeni, L. Kidzinski, and P. Dillenbourg. How employment constrains participation in moocs. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Educational Data Mining, pages 376377, 2016.  [4] M. S. Boroujeni, K. Sharma,  L. Kidzinski, L. Lucignano, and P. Dillenbourg. How to quantify students regularity In European Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning, pages 277291. Springer, 2016.  [5] C. G. Brinton, M. Chiang, S. Jain, H. Lam, Z. Liu, and F. M. F. Wong. Learning about social learning in moocs: From statistical analysis to generative model. IEEE transactions on Learning Technologies, 7(4):346359, 2014.  [6] O. Daems, M. Erkens, N. Malzahn, and H. U. Hoppe. Using content analysis and domain ontologies to check    learners understanding of science concepts. Journal of Computers in Education, 1(2):113131, 2014.  [7] P. Dillenbourg, N. Li, and  L. Kidzinski. From Books to MOOCs Emerging Models of Learning and Teaching in Higher Education, chapter The complications of the orchestration clock. Portland Press, 2016.  [8] P. Doreian, V. Batagelj, A. Ferligoj, and M. Granovetter. Generalized Blockmodeling (Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences). Cambridge University Press, 2004.  [9] N. Gillani and R. Eynon. Communication patterns in massively open online courses. The Internet and Higher Education, 23:18  26, 2014.  [10] N. Gillani, T. Yasseri, R. Eynon, and I. Hjorth. Structural limitations of learning in a crowd: communication vulnerability and information diffusion in moocs. Scientific Reports, 4:6447, 2014.  [11] T. Hecking, I. A. Chounta, and H. U. Hoppe. Analysis of user roles and the emergence of themes in discussion forums. In Proceedings of the 2nd European Network Intelligence Conference, ENIC15, pages 114121. IEEE, 2015.  [12] T. Hecking, I.-A. Chounta, and H. U. Hoppe. Investigating social and semantic user roles in mooc discussion forums. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge, LAK16, pages 198207. ACM, 2016.  [13] S. Joksimovic, A. Manataki, D. Gasevic, S. Dawson, V. Kovanovic, and I. F. de Kereki. Translating network position into performance: Importance of centrality in different network configurations. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge, LAK16, pages 314323. ACM, 2016.  [14] S. Kellogg, S. Booth, and K. Oliver. A social network perspective on peer supported learning in moocs for educators. The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 15(5), 2014.  [15] R. F. Kizilcec, E. Schneider, G. L. Cohen, and D. A. McFarland. Encouraging forum participation in online courses with collectivist, individualist and neutral motivational framings. Experiences and best practices in and around MOOCs, pages 1726, 2014.  [16] W. Liu,  L. Kidzinski, and P. Dillenbourg. Semiautomatic annotation of mooc forum posts. In State-of-the-Art and Future Directions of Smart Learning, pages 399408. Springer, 2016.  [17] A. Loya, A. Gopal, I. Shukla, P. Jermann, and R. Tormey. Conscientious behaviour, flexibility and learning in massive open on-line courses. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 191:519525, 2015.  [18] P. Oleksandra and D. Shane. Untangling mooc learner networks. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge, LAK16, pages 208212. ACM, 2016.  [19] D. F. Onah, J. Sinclair, R. Boyatt, and J. Foss. Massive open online courses: learner participation. In Proceeding of the 7th International Conference of Education, Research and Innovation, pages 23482356, 2014.  [20] A. Ramesh, D. Goldwasser, B. Huang, H. Daume III,  and L. Getoor. Modeling learner engagement in moocs using probabilistic soft logic. In NIPS Workshop on Data Driven Education, volume 21, page 62, 2013.  [21] G. Robins, P. Pattison, Y. Kalish, and D. Lusher. An introduction to exponential random graph (p*) models for social networks. Social Networks, 29(2):173  191, 2007.  [22] C. P. Rose and O. Ferschke. Technology support for discussion based learning: From computer supported collaborative learning to the future of massive open online courses. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 26(2):660678, 2016.  [23] L. A. Rossi and O. Gnawali. Language independent analysis and classification of discussion threads in coursera mooc forums. In Proceedings of the 15th International IEEE Conference on Information Reuse and Integration, IRI14, pages 654661. IEEE, 2014.  [24] A. Sharif and B. Magrill. Discussion forums in moocs. International Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Research, 12(1), 2015.  [25] M. Studer and G. Ritschard. What matters in differences between life trajectories: a comparative review of sequence dissimilarity measures. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 179(2):481511, 2016.  [26] S. Wasserman and K. Faust. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, volume 1 of Structural analysis in the social sciences. Cambridge University Press, 1994.  [27] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of small-worldnetworks. Nature, 393(6684):440442, 1998.  [28] A. F. Wise, Y. Cui, and J. Vytasek. Bringing order to chaos in mooc discussion forums with content-related thread identification. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge, pages 188197. ACM, 2016.  [29] J.-S. Wong, B. Pursel, A. Divinsky, and B. J. Jansen. Analyzing mooc discussion forum messages to identify cognitive learning information exchanges. In Proceedings of the 78th ASIS&T Annual Meeting: Information Science with Impact: Research in and for the Community, ASIST15, pages 23:123:10. American Society for Information Science, 2015.  [30] D. Yang, D. Adamson, and C. P. Rose. Question recommendation with constraints for massive open online courses. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Recommender systems, pages 4956. ACM, 2014.  [31] D. Yang, T. Sinha, D. Adamson, and C. P. Rose. Turn on, tune in, drop out: Anticipating student dropouts in massive open online courses. In Proceedings of the 2013 NIPS Data-driven education workshop, volume 11, page 14, 2013.  [32] J. Zhang, M. Skryabin, and X. Song. Understanding the dynamics of mooc discussion forums with simulation investigation for empirical network analysis (siena). Distance Education, 37(3):270286, 2016.  [33] S. Zheng, M. B. Rosson, P. C. Shih, and J. M. Carroll. Designing moocs as interactive places for collaborative learning. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale, L@S15, pages 343346. ACM, 2015.    