Current and Future Multimodal Learning Analytics Data Challenges  Daniel Spikol Malm University Malm, Sweden  daniel.spikol@mah.se  Luis P. Prieto Tallinn University Tallinn, Estonia  lprisan@tlu.ee  M. J. Rodrguez-Triana REACT Group, EPFL  Lausanne, Switzerland maria.rodrigueztriana@epfl.ch  Marcelo Worsley Northwestern University  Evanston, IL, USA mw@northwestern.edu  Xavier Ochoa ESPOL  Guayaquil, Ecuador xavier@cti.espol.edu.ec  Mutlu Cukurova UCL Knowledge Lab  London, UK m.cukurova@ucl.ac.uk  ABSTRACT Multimodal Learning Analytics (MMLA) captures, integrates and analyzes learning traces from different sources in or- der to obtain a more holistic understanding of the learn- ing process, wherever it happens. MMLA leverages the in- creasingly widespread availability of diverse sensors, high- frequency data collection technologies and sophisticated ma- chine learning and artificial intelligence techniques. The aim of this workshop is twofold: first, to expose participants to, and develop, different multimodal datasets that reflect how MMLA can bring new insights and opportunities to investi- gate complex learning processes and environments; second, to collaboratively identify a set of grand challenges for fur- ther MMLA research, built upon the foundations of previous workshops on the topic.  CCS Concepts Applied computing  Interactive learning environ- ments; Collaborative learning; Information systems  Data analytics;  Keywords Multimodal learning analytics; datasets; challenges.  1. WORKSHOP BACKGROUND The field of learning analytics is shifting from an emerg-  ing area of research, into mainstream educational research and practice. The inherently blended nature of most current learning settings, makes it essential to move beyond learn- ing analytics that rely solely on a single data source (usually log files). Multimodal learning analytics (MMLA) provides insights into such learning processes that happen across mul- tiple contexts between people, devices and resources (both  Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).  LAK 16 Vancouver, BC Canada c 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).  ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03.  DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029437  physical and digital), which often are hard to model and orchestrate [4, 5, 7, 8].  MMLA leverages the increasingly widespread availability of sensors and high-frequency data collection technologies to enrich the existing data available. Using such technologies in combination with machine learning and artificial intelligence techniques, LA researchers can now perform text, speech, handwriting, sketch, gesture, affective, neurophysical, or eye gaze analyses [2, 6].  The workshop builds upon previous MMLA workshops at LAK, focusing on hands-on exposure to multimodal datasets and techniques for analysis. In addition, this workshop in- troduced the opportunity for participants to present their own multimodal datasets, as well as future-looking MMLA challenges and concepts, helping define this emerging field through discussion and feedback.  1.1 MMLA Community Foci This full-day workshop was organised following the two  main emphases of this emergent community. The first one is to build up and expand the community by letting partic- ipants explore multimodal techniques and data, using pre- made environments and sample datasets. This helps new- comers to learn and explore, and lets experienced partic- ipants see and discuss different approaches. Furthermore, in this workshop participants also were encouraged to sub- mit contributions proposing new MMLA datasets that the community can use in the future, as well as future-oriented visions and challenges.  The discussion on the initial and participant-submitted multimodal datasets, and the techniques that can be used to gather and analyze them, set the stage for the second emphasis of the community: unearthing the major future challenges in MMLA research, and steering the community towards overcoming them.  2. WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES The workshop has two interrelated objectives that frame  the emerging interest in MMLA. The workshop aims to cre- ate a common ground for better understanding the current state of research and practice. As the MMLA community grows, it is also necessary to launch a set of future grand challenges to guide research, practice, and to bring together the different viewpoints of the field.    Disseminate the state of MMLA research through sharing datasets: Building upon previous workshop edi- tions (in the LAK and ICMI conferences), this workshop ex- plored advanced approaches and techniques for working with multimodal datasets. By providing access to high-quality datasets, participants were able to contrast analyses, trig- gering in-depth discussions and learning about the kinds of insights that can be gained from different techniques.  Discuss the current and future MMLA challenges: By letting participants submit their own multimodal datasets, this workshop continued previous efforts, expanding the dis- cussion about what constitutes good practice for the design of data and analysis of MMLA. Furthermore, as the MMLA community grows, it was necessary to bring together differ- ent viewpoints of the field, to help identify future challenges, and define an agenda that guides MMLA in advancing re- search and practice.  2.1 Target Participants The workshop welcomed researchers that submitted mul-  timodal datasets, techniques or future challenges prior to the workshop. It also welcomed participants without a prior contribution, that desired to learn about MMLA and con- tribute to the discussion. All in all, participants came from different backgrounds:  Existing MMLA researchers. The LAK conference is the annual meeting for MMLA researchers, and continues to build upon the efforts of past workshops, accommodating the growing interest and work in MMLA.  New MMLA researchers. One of the key aims of the workshop is to attract new researchers from the LAK com- munity to MMLA, and especially into its new Special Inter- est Group1 (SIG). The low barrier to participate, with the hands-on sessionand the discussions, provided a dual oppor- tunity to attract new researchers and practitioners.  LA researchers and practitioners. The workshop is also aimed at bringing together other LA researchers and practitioners that can discover there how to incorporate mul- timodal data and techniques into their ongoing research.  2.2 Initial Datasets The workshop used the Math Data Corpus [3], Oral Pre-  sentation Quality [1], and PELARS Project2 datasets. The first two data corpora have been used in previous work- shops, and are well documented. On the other hand, the PELARS dataset was new and provided a contrast for dis- cussion about what makes a good multimodal dataset. The participant-submitted datasets provided seeds and new pos- sibilities for eventual use in future MMLA events.  2.3 Dissemination Strategy The workshop had two main planned outputs to be dis-  seminated. First, the sharing of existing techniques and datasets, created among the research community and in- terested stakeholders. Additionally, the participant submis- sions formed the foundation for a set of grand challenges and a research agenda for MMLA, to support the forthcom- ing MMLA-SIG within the SoLAR community. After the conference, full-length submissions resulting from the dis- cussions will be published on CEUR, and we are exploring the joint edition of future journal special issues on the topic.  1http://sigmla.org/ 2http://www.pelars.eu  The workshop used the LAK17 channels for the call of participation. Additionally, the organizers used their net- work of contacts (and that of the Program Committee), to personally contact a broad range of researchers and practi- tioners that have overlapping interests in related fields. The new-born MMLA SIG will serve as the main channel to con- solidate the interest around the workshop.  2.4 Program Committee Apart from the workshop organisers, the following re-  searchers will be part of the program committee: Alejandra Martnez Mones, UVA, Spain; Barbara Wasson, University of Bergen, Norway; Cynthia DAngelo, SRI, USA; Davinia Hernandez-Leo, UPF, Spain; Denise Whitelock, OU, UK; Manolis Mavrikis, UCL, UK; Nour El Mawas, Institut Mines- Telecom, France; Paulo Blikstein, Stanford, USA; Roberto Martinez-Maldonado, UTS, Australia.  3. ADDITIONAL AUTHORS Additional authors: Bahtijar Vogel (Malmo University,  bahtijar.vogel@mah.se), Emanuele Ruffaldi (Scuola Supe- riore SantAnna, e.ruffaldi@sssup.it), and Ulla Lunde Ringtved (University College Nordjylland, ulr@ucn.dk).  4. REFERENCES [1] L. Chen, G. Feng, J. Joe, C. W. Leong, C. Kitchen, and  C. M. Lee. Towards automated assessment of public speaking skills using multimodal cues. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, ICMI14, pages 200203, New York, NY, USA, nov 2014. ACM Press.  [2] P. J. Donnelly, N. Blanchard, B. Samei, A. M. Olney, X. Sun, B. Ward, S. Kelly, M. Nystran, and S. K. DMello. Automatic teacher modeling from live classroom audio. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on User Modeling Adaptation and Personalization, UMAP16, pages 4553, New York, NY, USA, jul 2016. ACM Press.  [3] L.-P. Morency, S. Oviatt, S. Scherer, N. Weibel, and M. Worsley. ICMI 2013 Grand Challenge Workshop on Multimodal Learning Analytics. ICMI13, pages 373378, 2013.  [4] X. Ochoa, M. Worsley, K. Chiluiza, and S. Luz. MLA14: Third Multimodal Learning Analytics Workshop and Grand Challenges. ICMI14, pages 531532, 2014.  [5] X. Ochoa, M. Worsley, N. Weibel, and S. Oviatt. Multimodal Learning Analytics Data Challenges. LAK16, pages 498500, 2016.  [6] L. P. Prieto, K. Sharma, P. Dillenbourg, and M. J. Rodrguez-Triana. Teaching analytics: Towards automatic extraction of orchestration graphs using wearable sensors. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge - LAK16, pages 148157, New York, NY, USA, apr 2016. ACM Press.  [7] S. Scherer, M. Worsley, and L. Morency. 1st International Workshop on Multimodal Learning Analytics. ICMI12, page 609, 2012.  [8] M. Worsley, K. Chiluiza, J. F. Grafsgaard, and X. Ochoa. 2015 Multimodal Learning and Analytics Grand Challenge. ICMI15, pages 525529, 2015.      