Write-and-Learn: Promoting Meaningful Learning    through Concept Map-Based Formative Feedback    on Writing Assignments  Ye Xiong   New Jersey Institute of Technology  323 Dr Martin Luther King Jr Blvd   Newark, NJ 07102-1982  973-596-3368   yx98@njit.edu  Yi-Fang Brook Wu  New Jersey Institute of Technology  323 Dr Martin Luther King Jr Blvd   Newark, NJ 07102-1982  973-596-5285   wu@njit.edu     ABSTRACT  A primary goal of higher education is to promote meaningful   learning: the delivery of core academic content to students in   innovative ways that allow them to learn and then apply what they   have learned. As a pedagogical strategy, Writing-to-Learn (WTL)   intends to use writing to improve students understanding of   course content and concepts. To improve students meaningful   learning of conceptual knowledge in WTL activities, the project   proposes to develop the Write-and-Learn system to generate   automated formative feedback by taking advantage of the concept   maps constructed from instructors lecture notes and individual   students writing assignments. The proposed research aims to   provide insights into how to apply concept maps into WTL   activities to generate effective formative feedback on the   acquisition and development of conceptual knowledge, and   explore how and to what extent concept map-based formative   feedback can be utilized to scaffold and promote meaningful   learning in WTL activities.     CCS Concepts   Computing methodologies  Artificial intelligence    Natural language processing  Social and professional topics    Professional topics  Computing education  Student   assessment  Applied computing  Education  E-learning.   Keywords  Writing-to-Learn; Concept Mapping; Automated Formative   Feedback; Natural Language Processing   1. INTRODUCTION  To ensure student success in academic and career development, it   is imperative to promote meaningful learning for students at all   levels: the delivery of core academic content to students in   innovative ways that allow them to learn and then apply what they   have learned [1]. As a pedagogical strategy, Writing-to-Learn   (WTL) has been widely adopted to improve students deep   understanding of conceptual knowledge through various WTL   activities such as summary, reflection essay, and discussion, etc.   These writing assignments are ubiquitous in higher education,   which can reflect what students know about course topics and   develop higher-level cognitive process that facilitates meaningful   learning. However, previous research suggests that without   formative feedback, students are still lack of effective guidance to   improve their conceptual understanding during the WTL   activities. Also, it is too labor intensive for an instructor to   provide timely formative feedback throughout the duration of an   assignment for a whole class of individual students. To address   the need, concept map, as a cognitive visualization and   pedagogical tool to visualize the relationships among different   concepts, can be utilized to generate formative feedback on the   acquisition and development of conceptual knowledge in WTL   activities. Therefore, this project proposes to develop the Write-  and-Learn framework to provide effective formative feedback   with the help of concept maps throughout a WTL activity.    The framework first utilizes the available NLP techniques to build   a domain concept map from the lecture notes for a specific course   subject. During a WTL activity, the NLP techniques can be then   applied to construct a student concept map that models the   concepts and their relationships in the assignment-in-progress. By   comparing the two maps on-demand, the framework will be   focused on generating actionable and individualized formative   feedback automatically, guiding individual students to improve   their writing assignments and learning performance in a WTL   context. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first research   team that proposes to develop the concept map-based formative   feedback to promote meaningful learning in WTL activities. Our   primary research questions include:   RQ1. How effective is the formative feedback generated based on   the comparison between domain concept map and student concept   map   RQ2. Whether and how do students utilize the concept map-based   formative feedback on writing assignments    RQ3. To what extent the concept map-based formative feedback   on writing assignments can affect student learning outcomes   2. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  The proposed Write-and-Learn framework is a new kind of   intelligent concept map-based writing and learning support system   that provides effective (i.e., automated, real-time, actionable and   individualized) formative feedback through the comparison   between the visual knowledge representation of lecture notes (i.e.,   domain concept map) and that of writing assignments (i.e., student   concept map) to improve student learning in WTL activities. The   concept map-based writing and learning support system will be   Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are   not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that   copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights  for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other   uses, contact the Owner/Author.   Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada   ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03.   DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029453     developed via the available NLP techniques, including three   major components: (1) domain concept mapping; (2) student   concept mapping; and (3) formative feedback generation.    2.1 Module 1: Domain Concept Mapping  The module of domain concept mapping is to construct   knowledge representation from lecture notes (i.e., PowerPoint   Slides). With the chosen lecture notes for a specific course subject   as input, the module can automatically extract the domain   concepts and relationships, and output the ranked lists of concepts   and relationships for constructing domain concept map. In order   to generate automated and real-time formative feedback, it is   important to construct a domain concept map from course   materials such as lecture notes, which will be used as a reference   to show the gap between actual and desired learning performance.   A considerable body of literature has demonstrated the feasibility   of automatic or semi-automatic construction of concept maps   from different textual data sources in an educational context,   including lecture notes, textbooks, student essays, and academic   articles, etc. For our research purpose, we will leverage the most   recent and proven effective NLP approach, i.e., syntactic parsing   and Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging, proposed by Atapattu et al. [2-  4] to automatically construct a domain concept map from digital   lecture notes for a specific course subject.    2.2 Module 2: Student Concept Mapping  The module of student concept mapping is to construct knowledge   representation from writing assignments. With the writing   assignments of individual students as input, the module can   automatically extract the concepts and their relationships from   them, and output the ranked lists of concepts and relationships for   constructing the concept maps of individual students. In order to   generate actionable and individualized formative feedback, it is   important to construct the individual student concept map that   models the concepts and their relationships demonstrated in the   assignment-in-progress during the WTL activities. The datasets   used to construct student concept map are the writing assignments   of individual students. In the Write-and-Learn environment, the   writing assignments are typically designed to help students   understand and apply academic content or conceptual knowledge   presented in a course. Following the similar approach as domain   concept mapping, we can construct student concept map.   2.3 Module 3: Formative Feedback  Generation  The module is to generate formative feedback based on the   comparison between relevant domain concept map and student   concept map, which is the focus and most important technical   contribution of the proposed research. With the lists of ranked   concepts and relationships for relevant domain concept map and   student concept map as input, the module outputs a ranked list of   suggestions as formative feedback that shows the missing   concepts or unestablished relationships among concepts that   students might consider for revisions. In order to make sure that   the generated formative feedback is relevant to corresponding   writing assignments, it is important to specify the relevant domain   concept map for each writing assignment.   In the proposed system, the concept map-based formative   feedback will be provided in the form of facilitative feedback,   which contains a ranked list of suggestions that shows the missing   concepts or unestablished relationships among concepts that   students might consider for revisions so as to guide them toward   better responses or deeper learning. The ranked list of suggestions   can show students how to improve their coursework step by step   and provide them with specific guidance in the acquisition and   development of conceptual knowledge. For instance, if any   concept or relationship is missing, the formative feedback will be   generated as follows: Here is a list of suggestions on concepts   and their relationships you might consider based on how   important they are in the course. 1. Concepts you might consider   including: Cloud Computing; 2. Relationships you might consider   establishing: Cloud Computing  Outsourcing; 3. as illustrated   in Figure 1.   3. CURRENT WORK  At the current stage, the proposed concept map-based formative   feedback system as illustrated in Figure 1 is under design and   development and is expected to be ready for a pilot study by   Spring 2017 at NJIT. For our research purpose, the domain   concept map is constructed from the lecture notes for a specific   course offered by the Department of Informatics at NJIT. Besides,   the initial prototype (version one) will be tested in Winter 2016.       4. REFERENCES  [1] From the Alliance for Excellent Education, 2011. A time for   deeper learning preparing students for a changing world.   Education Digest: Essential Readings Condensed for Quick   Review, 77, 4, 43-49.   [2] Atapattu, T., Falkner, K., and Falkner, N., 2012. Automated  extraction of semantic concepts from semi-structured data:   Supporting computer-based education through the analysis of   lecture notes. In Database and Expert Systems Applications   Springer, 161-175.   [3] Atapattu, T., Falkner, K., and Falkner, N., 2014. Acquisition  of triples of knowledge from lecture notes: A natural   langauge processing approach. In Proceedings of the   Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on   Educational Data Mining (London, United Kingdom 2014),   193-196.   [4] Atapattu, T., Falkner, K., and Falkner, N., 2014. Evaluation  of concept importance in concept maps mined from lecture   notes: computer vs human. In Proceedings of the 6th   International Conference on Computer Supported Education   (Barcelona, Spain 2014), 75-84.   Figure 1. Mockup showing how Write-and-Learn   provides the student with concept map-based formative   feedback in the course of writing.           