GLASS: A Learning Analytics Visualization Tool  Derick Leony, Abelardo Pardo, Luis de la Fuente Valentn, David Snchez de Castro, Carlos Delgado Kloos  University Carlos III of Madrid Avenida Universidad 30  28911 Legans (Madrid) Spain dleony@it.uc3m.es, abel@it.uc3m.es, lfuente@it.uc3m.es,  dscastro@inv.it.uc3m.es, cdk@it.uc3m.es  ABSTRACT The use of technology in every day tasks enables the pos- sibility to collect large amounts of observations of events taking place in different environments. Most tools are capa- ble of storing a detailed account of the operations executed by users in certain files commonly known as logs. These files can be further analyzed to infer information that is not directly visible such as the most popular applications, times of the day with highest activity, calories burnt after a run- ning session, etc. Graphic visualizations of this data can be used to support this type of analysis as shown in [1]. Visu- alization can also be applied in the domain of learning ex- periences to track and analyse the data obtained from both learners and instructors. There are several tools that have been proposed in specific environments such as, for example, in personal learning environments [5], to foster self-reflection and awareness [2], and to support instructors in web-based distance learning [3]. These visualizations need to take into account aspects such as how to access and protect personal data, filter management, multi-user support and availability. In this paper, the web-based visualization platform GLASS (Gradients Learning Analytics System) is presented. The architecture of the tool has been conceived to support a large number of modular visualizations derived from a com- mon dataset containing a large number of recorded events. The tool was developed following a bottom-up methodology to provide a set of basic operations required by any visu- alization. The design goal is to provide a highly versatile, modular platform that simplifies the implementation of new visualizations.  The main functionality elements considered in GLASS are database access, module management, visualization param- eters, and the web interface. The platform uses datasets stored using the CAM schema (Contextualized Attention Metadata) [6]. This schema allows to capture events occur- ring during the use of various computer applications which, in our case, are the tools used by students when working in a learning environment. The process to obtain events from  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. LAK 12, 29 April  2 May 2012, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Copyright 2012 ACM ACM 978-1-4503-1111-3/12/04 ...$10.00.  learning environments has been described in [4]. GLASS is able to connect to more than one CAM database, thus allowing access to events obtained in different contexts.  The tool is extensible through the installation of modules. A module is a structured set of scripts and resources that, given a dataset of events and a set of filters, generates at least one visualization. In order to simplify the development of new modules, the platform provides an API to manage common visualizations settings such as the date range and other typical filters. A visualization may include a simpler version suitable to be displayed in the users Dashboard, which is the entry page of the application. Figure 1 shows an example of dashboard in GLASS. Additionally, visual- izations can be exported as HTML code to be embedded in another website.  The GLASS architecture consists of four layers: data layer, code base, modules and visualizations, as depicted in Fig- ure 2. The data layer is composed of a set of CAM databases and a database to store the platform parameters. The code base is in charge of the main functionalities of GLASS re- garding module and user management and interfaces. Mod- ules must comply with the platform specifications to gen- erate visualizations and the settings that can affect their appearance. Currently, the tool includes a default module that provides two visualizations as shown in Figure 1): a frequency time line of activity events and a bar-chart with grouped bars of events generated by different user groups (e.g. events from students individually, or groups). The de- fault module also serves as an example of how to develop a additional modules.  Figure 2: The four layers of GLASS architecture.  Currently, GLASS is able to support new visualizations  162    Figure 1: GLASS Dashboard. Four visualizations provided by one module.  and is undergoing additional testing in different learning scenarios. Preliminary results obtained from user tests in- dicate that visualizations need to be very intuitive for both instructors and learners. The current development effort is focused on providing visualizations that show the most- common learners events and the most active learners in a given context. To encourage its use in other institutions, the tool has been released with an open source license and can be obtained from http://glass.mozart.gast.it.uc3m.es. A video demonstrating the tool is available at http://bit. ly/glass-lak12.  Keywords Learning analytics, visualization system, visualization frame- work  Categories and Subject Descriptors J.1 [Administrative Data Processing]: Education; K.3.1 [Computers Uses in Education]: Collaborative learning, Computer-assisted instruction (CAI), Computer-managed in- struction (CMI), Distance learning  Acknowledgment Work partially funded by the EEE project, Plan Nacional de I+D+I TIN2011-28308-C03-01 and the Emadrid: In- vestigacion y desarrollo de tecnologias para el e-learning en la Comunidad de Madrid project (S2009/TIC-1650).  1. REFERENCES [1] S. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings  in information visualization: using vision to think, chapter 1, pages 134. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.  [2] S. Govaerts, K. Verbert, E. Duval, and A. Pardo. The Student Activity Meter for Awareness and Self-reflection. In ACM SIGCHI International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2012.  [3] R. Mazza and V. Dimitrova. Visualising student tracking data to support instructors in web-based distance education. In Proceedings of the 13th international World Wide Web conference on Alternate track papers & posters, pages 154161. ACM, 2004.  [4] V. A. Romero Zaldvar, A. Pardo, D. Burgos, and C. Delgado Kloos. Monitoring Student Progress Using Virtual Appliances : A Case Study. Computers & Education, 58(4):10581067, 2012.  [5] J. Santos, K. Verbert, S. Govaerts, and E. Duval. Visualizing ple usage. In Proceedings of EFEPLE11 1st Workshop on Exploring the Fitness and Evolvability of Personal Learning Environments. CEUR workshop proceedings, 2011.  [6] M. Wolpers, J. Najjar, K. Verbert, and E. Duval. Tracking actual usage: the attention metadata approach. Journal of Technology Education & Society, 10(3):106121, 2007.  163      