LAK 2012 Panel   Panel Proposal: Building Organizational Capacity for  Analytics  Donald M. Norris  President, Strategic Initiatives, Inc.    stratinti@aol.com   Linda Baer  Program Officer,    The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation   linda.baer@gatesfoundation.org      PANEL SUMMARY  The field of analytics is mushrooming. Analytics is perceived as   the potential decoder for institutional transformation. Given the   mandates for improved assessment, accountability and   performance, analytical tools are in high demand. A critical goal   is to optimize student success by managing the student pipeline   to success, eliminating structural and programmatic impediments   to retention and success and by utilizing dynamic query,   reporting, intervention and embedded predictive analytics to   respond to at-risk behavior. Additional optimization practices are   emerging as well: Expanded data mining, early-stage learner   relationship management practices, and consideration of   employability success. This panel presentation will describe the   tools leading-edge institutions are using and what tools vendors   are offering. The gap between supply and demand will be the   main focus of the session.    Categories & Subject Descriptors   J.1 [Administrative Data Processing] Education; K.3.1   [Computer Uses in Education] Collaborative learning   General Terms  Learning Analytics, Education   PANEL PRESENTATION  Leading-edge institutions of all kinds and technology vendors are   actively deploying tools, applications and solutions to address   these opportunities. A wide range of vendor offerings are   involved: BI tools, ERP, LMS, analytics, retention, and personal   learning tools. Enterprise infrastructures for data, information   and analytics are evolving rapidly, accepting mash-ups of all   sorts of new applications and solutions from new vendors and the   emerging field of learning analytics. Leading-edge institutions   are actively leveraging these new developments.   In order to understand the state of the field in terms of tools and   capacity to employ tools to improve the data analytics in higher   education, a series of surveys have been conducted with leading   higher education institutions and leading vendors who offer   analytics tools, applications solutions, and services. An   assessment of the gap between supply and demand serves as an   important launching place for describing the energy of these   developments and establishing the next generation of analytical   capabilities in higher education. This session includes four   panelists who will speak about the dynamics of the   practice/marketplace and the supply/demand and gap issues   related to organizational capacity in analytics.   A survey of capacity-building activities was conducted with forty   leading institutions using analytics to advance student access and   success. Over twenty leading vendors were surveyed in relation   to the focus on BI, ERP, LMS, analytics, retention solutions. This   research resulted in an inventory of:    The functional analytics needs and aspirations of a  cohort of institutions who are recognized as leading   practitioners of analytics in addressing student success,   performance enhancement and accountability; and the   combination of build, buy and mash-up strategies being   followed;    Insights on the different approaches of different types  of leading institutions (for-profit, research universities,   comprehensive universities, private institutions,   community colleges, and systems of institutions);    Analytics products/solutions, strategies, and roadmaps  by technology vendors serving higher education;    A description of gaps between supply in vendor  offerings and demands/capabilities of institutions in the   current and future timeframes; this includes issues of   both vendor and institutional capacity;    Moving to actionable use of the analytics by  dynamically analyzing student performance, informing   students of progress and invoking interventions   immediately when students display at-risk behaviors;    Embedding predictive and tracking analytics in  academic and administrative processes;    Practicing learner relationship management, including  eEmbedding enhanced learning analytics; and    Building and engaging in large-scale data mining to  discover new insights on learner success across learner   segments, institutions and sectors (learning and work).   In assessing the gap between needs and solutions in the context   of organizational capacity, this research articulates how   institutions are looking for a combination of analytic capabilities,   services and developmental consultation that will enable them to   build the organizational capacity to enhance student success.     Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or  republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific  permission and/or a fee.   LAK12, 29 April May 2, 2012, Vancouver, BC, Country.  Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1111-3/12/04 $10.00.   18    Vendors offer a variety of tools, applications, services, solutions,   and consultation that can be part of that capacity building.   Institutional leaders have defined a variety of gaps between what   they needs to build adequate capacity and what is currently   broadly available from vendors, professional organizations, or   other sources.   This discussion will enable the audience to hear results of this   important survey work on analytical capabilities as well as   participate in the discussion of current and future needs to   optimize tools and solutions for student success.   FOUR PANELIST   1.  Donald M. Norris, President, Strategic Initiatives, Inc.   2. Linda Baer, Program Officer, The Bill & Melinda Gates  Foundation   3. Two institutional respondents from the survey (Can draw  from list)   In addition, we will engage any vendors in the audience during   Q&A (Or if the numbers are not large, we could include them on   the panel)     19      