
Considering Formal Assessment in Learning Analytics 
within a PLE: The HOU2LEARN Case

Eleni Koulocheri 
Hellenic Open University 
Parodos Aristotelous 18 
26 335 Patra, Greece 
(0030) 2610 367617 

ekoulocheri@eap.gr

 Michalis Xenos 
Hellenic Open University 
Parodos Aristotelous 18 
26 335 Patra, Greece 
(0030) 2610 367695 
xenos@eap.gr 

ABSTRACT 
Personal Learning Environments are used more and more by the 
academic community. They can coexist with formal courses as a 
communication and collaboration channel. In this paper, an 
application of learning analytics into HOU2LEARN, a Personal 
Learning Environment set by Hellenic Open University is 
discussed. The present part of research focuses on the social 
network analysis as a branch of learning analytics, along with 
formal grading system. Since it is an ongoing research, this paper 
presents the preliminary results of the study of the correlation 
between the social network metrics and the formal grades, through 
a test case course, the PLH42. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
D.3.3 [Programming Languages]: Measurement, Documentation, 
Design, Verification. 

General Terms 
Measurement, Documentation, Design, Verification. 

Keywords 
Learning Analytics, Social Network Analysis, Graphs, Metrics, 
Betweeness Centrality, Indegree Centrality, Outdegree Centrality, 
Centrality, Grades. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
It is commonly accepted that analytics can influence the digital 
activities, since they measure and monitor the digital routine, 
contributing to the enhancement of a user experience in terms of 
cost, quality and personalisation. However, they are also ready to 
play a key role in the educational digital life, with the specific term 
“learning analytics”, according the conference proceedings of both 
1st and 2nd Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference [2, 3]. 
This paper presents the application of learning analytics 
(hereinafter, LA), in a personal learning environment, 
HOU2LEARN, set by the Hellenic Open University (HOU). More 
specifically, this paper discusses the Social Network Analysis 
(hereinafter, SNA) aspect of LA in course level in an informal 
environment, and investigates it along with the formal grading 
system results that HOU applies in its courses. 

Section 2 presents the bibliography that supports LA and focuses 
in SNA as aspect of one of five axes that describe LA lifecycle. 

Furthermore, it outlines the research concept of this paper. 

Section 3 presents briefly HOU2LEARN, the PLE under research, 
its major functionalities and the way it is applied by HOU in the 
“PLH42” which is our test case. 

Section 4 involves the research part of this paper. Its first part 
presents the SNA tool that was used, describes the components of a 
typical SNA graph and outlines some standard SNA metrics. 
Furthermore, for completeness reasons, it presents briefly a set of 
additional metrics that measure the users activity and are part of 
ongoing research. It also presents the algorithm of formal grading 
that HOU applies in all courses. The second part presents four 
SNA graphs: in the first one, nodes’ size is proportional to final 
grade of each student, while in the three other graphs, nodes’ size 
is proportional to an SNA metric (outdegree, indegree and 
betweeness centrality respectively). Short discussion after each 
graph is also included. 

Section 5 includes some first remarks on the analysis of these four 
graphs and it also presents some steps of future work that aims to 
take into consideration the aforementioned metrics of activities, in 
order to complete the analytics concept, both formally and 
informally.  

2. TYPES OF LEARNING ANALYTICS 
The term Learning Analytics was initiated and officially defined 
during the 1st International Conference on Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge of 2011 as “the measurement, collection, analysis and 
reporting of data about learners and their contexts, for purposes of 
understanding and optimizing learning and the environments in 
which it occurs” [1, 2, 3]. Fournier et al. [5] advocate that learning-
related data collection and analysis would be related to both the 
increase of the effectiveness of learning, and possible changes in 
the learning process. According to Downes [9], most of the tools 
that measure learning engagement, measure trivial variables such 
as page access, geographical origin etc. considering these tools 
useful for a basic level of assessment, he believes that future 
analytic systems that will analyze even the learners’ contributions 
quality will arise. For other researchers [4, 10, 11], both learning 
improvement and provision of recommendations based on earlier 
learning activity could be covered by providing learners and 
moderators with information derived from analytics. 
Siemens and Long [1] propose five axes that define LA: 

• Course level: social network analysis, discourse analysis, 
learning trails. 

• Educational data mining: pattern recognition and 
predictive modeling.  

• Intelligent curriculum: development of semantically 
defined curriculum resources 

• Adaptive content: provision of adaptive content using 
recommendation procedures, based on learner behaviour  

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
 
LAK '13, April 08 - 12 2013, Leuven, Belgium. 
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04 $15.00. 

28



• Adaptive learning: social interaction and learner support 
as an adaptive learner process. 

This paper focuses on analytics derived from learning networks in 
the context of Personal Learning Environments (PLEs) through the 
H2L Open Educational Platform. It investigates the first axis which 
refers to course level and relates the research with SNA, learning 
trails and discourse measurement using activity metrics. In 
addition to that, formal assessment through grades has been taken 
into consideration for those H2L members that were also students 
of the Hellenic Open University and had to prepare six formal 
written essays and to participate to exams. 
SNA acts as a quantitative method of LA. Through network 
graphs, SNA aims to depict connections, by creating a connection 
graph. It also aims to reveal the central nodes of the connections’ 
grid and thus, the people on the network who created impact to 
their connections (neighbors) [5]. It consists of two basic building 
components: Nodes (or vertices or agents) and edges (or 
connections). Nodes usually represent physical members of a 
network, such as learners and instructors in case of an educational 
social network. They can also represent other social structures such 
as communities, groups, institutions, states or even countries, if 
necessary [12, 17]. Edges represent the connection between two 
nodes and consist of lines that point from one node to another. 
Edges may be directed or undirected; directed edges, represented 
as arrows, have an origin and a destination and may represent 
“who is following who”, ”who sends a message to whom” [12, 17] 
“who tells the secret to whom”, “who affects with a virus who”, 
etc, in general.  
Furthermore, in the context of a personal learning environment, 
users have a wide range of activities that occur from the 
engagement and involvement in a course. All these activities are 
involved in the term “discourse” according to Downes’ five axes 
[9]. Metrics can quantize in more detail the activity of the learners 
(or members in case of an educational social network) producing 
measurable results for questions like the following: Who 
comments on every type of content and how much?  Who does 
product more content? Who launches his/her own discussion topic?  
What content is produced per learner? Who feeds the most the 
public discussion of the course? This set of metrics is an additional 
tool towards the measurement of the learning activity using PLE 
produced data [17]. 
Both aforementioned aspects of a PLE (i.e. Connectedness and 
activities) refer to informal learning: The PLE under research, 
H2L, aims to facilitate this informal  communication among the 
learners of a formal course in which, at the same time, a formal 
grading system is applied. By formal communication, it is meant 
that, users communicate in loose and spontaneous way, without 
following a specified curriculum or strict rules. Communication 
takes place outside the official educational e-environments that are 
IBM Lotus Quickr and Moodle, in case of HOU. 
The research question is if there is a correlation between grades 
and activity within a (informal) PLE that is used in the context of a 
(formal) M.Sc course and this papers outlines the preliminary 
results from  

3. HOU2LEARN 
Learning environments come from a period of establishment of 
Learning Management Systems (LMSs) that give low 
opportunities for interaction, content-creation and collaboration. 
The emergence of Web 2.0 influenced also these environments 
which became more social, collaborative and provide great vital 

opportunities to create, maintain and redistribute content. They 
also incorporate strong social networking characteristics as well as 
a loosely structured collection of various widely used Web 2.0 
tools such as fora, wikis, blogs, fora, glossaries, etc  [13,  14, 15, 
17]. 
The Hellenic Open University (HOU) in order to let its students 
experience a PLE, has set up HOU2LEARN (H2L). It supports and 
in some cases, replaces the e-Learning process that takes place 
through the officially and formally established channels of 
traditional LMS environments and conferencing tools. It initially 
launched in September 2010 as part of an ongoing research within 
the Software Quality Research Group that studies the correlation 
between Learning 2.0 challenges, social networking activities and 
informal learning. The environment is based on the Elgg 
framework (http://www.elgg.org) and provides useful widgets such 
as file uploading and sharing, blogs, social bookmarks, personal 
pages, polls and status updates. User customization is also 
provided. H2L supports the creation of Groups with private or 
public access in order to allow uses with common interests to meet, 
collaborate and share content [17]. It was HOU’s research interest 
to use an informal environment such as HOU as a replacement of a 
formal e-learning environment e.g. IBM Lotus Quickr and Moodle, 
that HOU usually uses in order to support its (formal) classes. 
The most essential feature of H2L is the social networking 
component. Users are connected each other with the “Follower” 
connection; each user that “follows” another, receives notifications 
about content added or manipulated by the user or his/her activity 
in general. This feature allows user to create a network of interest 
with focus on his/her own personal needs, abilities and 
requirements without the noisy environment of an open social 
network platform [17]. 
In September 2011, the professors responsible for the postgraduate 
course “Special Issues on Software Engineering” (PLH42) of 
HOU, promoted H2L as the main environment of use for the 
objectives of this course. A special group named PLH42 has been 
established in order to allow students to have a common reference 
point for content strongly related to this specific course. Professors 
or other members of H2L could also be accepted as group 
members under request. All PLH42 members were encouraged to 
exploit the full potential of the environment and actively 
collaborate with each other, professors and other users. All 
questions were expressed an replied through H2L and all 
communication was accomplished though H2L. Other activities 
that H2L permitted were launching a new group discussion topic, 
uploading a blogpost on the group blog, or a file on the group files 
page, or a bookmark on the group bookmark page and all these 
items can be commented by other group members [17].  

4. RESEARCH AND TOOLS 
During the academic year 2011-2012, the course PLH42 ran 
completely through H2L instead of other well-established learning 
environments such as Moodle. Students and instructors were 
encouraged to register as members to H2L and then to follow the 
Members Group dedicated to the course PLH42 named “PLH42”. 
Behind that, the HOU learning analytics research team had set up 
direct access to the H2L Database using Navicat Premium and then 
Toad for MySQL 6.0.1. Database queries that extract all PLH42 
members (nodes) along with the connections (edges) lead to tables 
that had to be in format compatible with the SNA software. 
For SNA, a notable number of tools (such as Gephi, Sentinel, 
NodeXL, GraphViz, Ucinet, Touchgraph, GraphInsight) were 

29



tested and based on their capabilities, user friendliness and the 
requirements of the present study, NodeXL (1.0.1.209) was finally 
used.  

4.1 Learning Analytics 
4.1.1 Social Network Analysis 
Since H2L is an open educational social network, social 
connections have been developed among the members 
(learners/student, instructors/moderators and others). This is 
initially depicted with a SNA diagram that presents the 
connections of members of H2L that follow the Group “PLH42”, 
the presented case study course. Every PLH42 member is 
represented with a node and the member ID is also displayed. 
Directed edges (arrows) have been used and the arrow from 
member A to member B means that A follows B. Along with the 
basis of SNA that is Connectedness, there is a number of metrics 
that allow researchers to systematically slice up the social world, 
creating a basis on which to compare networks, track changes in a 
network over time and determine the relative position of 
individuals and groups within a network [12, 18, 19].  
The initial metrics just count the numbers of connections, while 
some others become more complex and count centrality, density 
transitivity, etc. In this paper, we focus on three SNA metrics [12, 
18, 19]: 
Indegree Centrality: Degree centrality counts the number of the 
total number of connections linked to a node. It presents the 
number of co-members a member is followed by. In case of 
directed graphs, indegree centrality counts the number of edges 
(arrows) that point inward at a node. This metric, in fact, measures 
the popularity of the node since it measures the number of other 
nodes that follow the node under measurement, and that want to be 
aware of its activity. 
Outdegree Centrality: This metric counts the number of edges 
(arrows) that point outward to other nodes. Outdegree centrality 
depicts the number of members, a member follows. It counts the 
tension of the node to be connected to other nodes and to be aware 
of their activities. 
Betweeness Centrality: This is a more sophisticated SNA metric 
that measures the brokering capability of a node. Although 
popularity is important, it is vital to measure if a node facilitates 
the transfer of an information (or content, or a virus, or a new, etc) 
to its neighbors. According to Hansen et al. betweeness centrality 
is a kind of “bridge” score and measures how much removing a 
person would disrupt the connections between other nodes in the 
network. Typically, it is a measure of how often a given node lies 
on the shortest path between two nodes. Hence, nodes that are 
included in many of the shortest paths between other nodes have a 
higher betweeness centrality than those that are not included on 
such paths. 

4.1.2 Metrics 
Aiming to permit learning trails and discoursing and content 
trafficking to be measurable, all members’ activity is planned to be 
quantified and operationalized using metrics [17]. These discourse 
metrics aim to quantitatively analyze data from activities that take 
place during the course lifecycle [6, 7, 8, 17] in order to be used 
potentially for the improvement of the learning procedure. For 
completeness reasons, this paper includes a set of metrics that aims 
to measure the traffic and activity within the pages of the course 
“PLH42”. These metrics which are part of ongoing research, are a 

first step towards the setting of a stable baseline implementation 
with which learning activity related metrics can be used for 
customized and personalized tracking of the quality of learning 
effects and the enhancement of the learning procedure [17]. 
According the aforementioned possibilities that H2L provides to 
the members of course PLH42, the metrics intend to quantize the 
‘trafficking’ content that is uploaded, commented and created. In 
this case the term “content” includes files, bookmarks, comments, 
blogposts, group discussion topics and wire posts. Considering that 
the set of metrics is not closed yet, at this phase of our research the 
proposed metrics follow: 
Number of:  

• new bookmarks in Group 
• new blogposts in Group Blog 
• topics that each user has uploaded on Group Discussion. 
• uploads of new files on Group Files page 
• new bookmarks in Group 
• comments on bookmarks uploaded by other Group 

members 
• comments on blogposts in Group Blog 
• comments on topics of Group Discussion 
• comments on files uploaded by other Group members 
• comments on wireposts of other Group Members 

Of course this list can be modified, along with the course design, 
i.e. in case a twitter widget is added after moderator’s request, 
another metric could be number of twitter with #plh42 hashtag. 
These metrics are included in this paper in order to outline the 
general idea of the ongoing research, however they are planned to 
be further elaborated in the next step of the research. This paper 
focuses on the measurements of the SNA metrics along with the 
formal grades in a M.Sc. class, in a preliminary level. 

4.1.3 Formal Assessment: Grades 
In PLH42, formal assessment was conducted using the grade ai, 
i=1,..,6 of six formal written essays that were due during the 
academic year along with the grade of the final exams e at the end 
of the year. Essays and exams were graded using the 0-10 scale. 
Students are allowed to participate in the exams if: > 30 
The final grade g is calculated as following:  = 0.7 ? + 0.3 ?  
For academic year 2011-12, the minimum grade was 5.05 and the 
maximum 9.76. 

4.2 Grades as attribute of nodes 
The initial concept was to take final grades (hereinafter, grades) 
into consideration in order to illustrate the formal assessment into 
social network analysis. This was conducted through the nodes’ 
size: although nodes’ size is used to SNA metrics such as 
betweeness centrality or degree, in this research, it illustrates the 
grade of each learner. Considering that in NodeXL, nodes’ size is 
between 1 and 100 and that it was intended all grades to be visible 
but proportional to each other, the grades were normalized and 
classified into 12 classes using statistics. For all 75 students, their 
grade corresponds to the central value of a class (which is the 

30



average value of the class boundaries), normalized to a scale from 
1 to 50. For PLH42 H2L members, but not PLH42 students (i.e. 
Tutors, other members), a unified size of 25 was applied. Tutors 
were illustrated with a red solid square and other users with a blue 
solid triangle (see Figure 1). For all graphs of this paper, the Harel-
Koren Fast Multiscale layout arrangement algorithm was applied 
[16]. With respect to privacy issues, all 83 members were denoted 
with an internal ID and no names or usernames were used. The 
student with the highest grade is marked with a black circle. For all 
graphs of this paper, the Harel-Koren Fast Multiscale layout 
arrangement algorithm was applied [25]. 

4.3 Centrality as attribute of nodes 
In order to compare the performance and the centrality of the users, 
two additional graphs were generated: Keeping the nodes position 
as is, Figure 2 presents the SNA graph where the size node is 
proportional to the indegree centrality normalized to a scale from 1 
to 50. It appears that all tutors have high indegree centrality since 
are “popular” in the student community. From the PLH42 students, 
the member with the highest indegree centrality didn’t have 
significantly high final grade; his grade was lower than the average 
grade of the course. His node is highlighted with a black circle. 
In Figure 3, the nodes’ size is proportional to oudegree centratility 
normalized to a scale from 1 to 50. Here, another user (in blue 
solid triangle) appears to be the member with the highest degree; 
This user was in charge with administrative duties. From the 
PLH42 students, the member with the highest outdegree centrality 
had also high final grade (her grade belonged to the highest class, 
see 4.2) and her node is marked with a black circle. 

Figure 1. H2L: Nodes’ size depicts the final grade. 

Figure 4 illustrates the connections where the size node is 
proportional to betweeness centrality; it appears that the node with 
the highest “brokering” power is not a student of PLH and has 
administrative duties. From the PLH42 students, the member with 
the highest betweeness centrality had also high final grade (her 
grade belonged to the highest class, see 4.2) and she was the same 
person as in outdegree centrality. Her node is highlighted with a 
black circle. 

Figure 2. H2L: Nodes’ size depicts the  
indegree centrality. 

Figure 3. H2L: Nodes’ size depicts the  
outdegree centrality. 

 

5. DISCUSSION – FUTURE WORK 
Since this paper presents a research context, there is a lot of 
research interest beyond the presented graphs. It appears that high 
grade of a member doesn’t mean for sure high betweeness 
centrality which expresses his/her brokering capabilities. This 
means that in case of content by a given student with high grade, it 
is not ensured that it would create significant impact to the others, 
if his betweeness centrality of the given student was low. 
Furthermore, it appears that the most “popular” members are the 
tutors. However, this requires statistical elaboration in order to 
investigate the correlation between grades and SNA metrics and 
vital outcomes are expected to occur.  The correspondent data of 

31



the next academic year 2012-13 will be also be captured and taken 
into consideration. 
Furthermore, in parallel, metrics presented in 4.1.2 are planned to 
be elaborated and translated into SQL queries and to calculate the 
values per member. This will be also combined with the SNA 
metrics and the formal assessment measurements, in order to 
measure both formal and informal parameters in the context of 
application of learning analytics in a personal learning 
environment. For example, measuring the activity of a member 
through the SQL queries, it will be identified if the member with 
the higher betweeness centrality (i.e. capability of brokerage) has 
also high levels of content creation; if so, it is possible that he/she 
has a vital role in the content distribution and then it could be 
identified if he influences his/her contacts accordingly. 
Finally, the measurement of formal and informal parameters are 
planned to be used in a smart recommendation algorithm so as the 
environment to provide more personalized and customized content 
to each user according to the needs and weaknesses. 

 
Figure 4. H2L: Nodes’ size depicts the  

betweeness centrality. 

6. REFERENCES 
[1] Siemens, G., and Long, P. 2011. Penetrating the Fog: 

Analytics in Learning and Education, EDUCAUSE Review 
Archive, 46, 5 (Sept.-Oct. 2011), 31-40. Available at: 
http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ERM1151.pdf 
(Retrieved: 15/04/2012). 

[2] 1st International Conference on Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge 2011, February 27-March 1, 2011 in Banff, 
Alberta. Available at: https://tekri.athabascau.ca/analytics/ 
(Retrieved: 15/04/2012). 

[3] 2nd International Conference on Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge 2012, April 29 – May 2, 2012 in Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada, Available at:  
http://lak12.sites.olt.ubc.ca// (Retrieved: 11/10/2012). 

[4] Dawson, S. Heathcote, L., and Poole, G. 2010. Harnessing 
ICT potential: The adaptation and analysis of ICT systems for 
enhancing the student learning experience, In Proceedings of 
International Journal of Educational Management, 24, 2, 
116-128, DOI=10.1108/09513541011020936. 

[5] Fournier, H., Kop, R., and Sitlia, H. 2011. The Value of 
learning analytics to networked learning on a personal 
learning environment. In Proceedings of the 1st International 
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (Banff, 
Alberta, Canada, February 27-March 1, 2011) LAK’11 
in Banff, Alberta, ACM, 104-109. ISBN: 978-1-4503-0944-8. 

[6] Christakis, N., and Fowler, J. H., 2009. Connected: The 
surprising power of our social networks and how they shape 
our lives. Little, Brown and Company; First Edition edition 
(Sept. 28, 2009). ISBN-10: 0316036145. 

[7] Ochoa, X. and Duval, E., 2008. Relevance ranking metrics for 
learning objetcs, IEEE Transactions on Learning 
Technologies, 1, 1 (Jan.-Mar. 2008) 34-48. 

[8] Ochoa, X. 2001. Learnometrics: Metrics for Learning 
Objects, LAK’11, In Proceedings of the 1st International 
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (Banff, 
Alberta, Canada, February 27-March 1, 2011) LAK’11 
in Banff, Alberta, ACM, 1-8. ISBN: 978-1-4503-0944-8. 

[9] Downes, S. 2010. Collaboration, Analytics, and the LMS: A 
Conversation with Stephen Downes, Campus Technology, 
Oct. 14, 2010. Available at: 
http://campustechnology.com/newsletters/ctfocus/2010/10/col
laboration_analytics_and-the-lms_a-conversation-with-
stephen-downes.aspx (Retrieved: 15/04/2012). 

[10] Parry, M. 2010. Like Netflix, New College Software Seeks to 
Personalize Recommendations. The Chronicle of Higher 
Education, October 2010. Available at: 
http://chronicle.com/blogs/wiredcampus/like-netflix-new-
college-software-aims-to-personalize-
recommendations/27642 (Retrieved: 15/04/2012). 

[11] Kop, R. 2010. The Design of a Personal Learning 
Environment: Researching the Learning Experience. 
European Distance and E-Learning Network Annual 
Conference 2010, June 2010, Valencia, Spain, Paper H4 32, 
2010.  

[12] Hansen, D. L, Schneiderman, B., and Smith, M. A. 2011. 
Analyzing Social Media Networks with NodeXL, Insighits 
from a Connected World. Morgan Kaufmann, imprint of 
Elsevier, ISBN: 978-0-12-382229-1, 2011. 

[13] Davis, I. 2005. Talis, Web 2.0 and All That, Internet Alchemy 
blog, 4 July 2005. Available at: 
http://blog.iandavis.com/2005/07/04/talis-web-2-0-and-all-
that/ (Retrieved: 15/04/2012). 

[14] Van Harmelen, M. 2006. Personal Learning Environments. In 
Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE International Conference on 
Advanced Learning Technologies, IEEE Computer Society, 
2006, 815-816. 

[15] Brown, J. S. and Adler, R. P. 2008. Minds on fire: Open 
education, the long tail, and learning 2.0, Educause Review, 
43, 1 (Jan.-Feb. 2008), 16-32.  

[16] Harel, D. and Koren, Y.  2001. A Fast Multi-scale Method for 
Drawing Large Graphs. In Proceedings of the 8th 
International Symposium on Graph Drawing (Banff, Alberta, 
Canada, May 08-12, 2007), GD '00. Springer-Verlag London, 
UK, 2001, 183 - 196. 

[17] Koulocheri, E., Soumplis, A., Xenos, M., 2012. Applying 
Learning Analytics in an Open Personal Learning 
Environment: A quantitative approach. In Proceedings of the 
16th Pan-hellenic Conference on Informatics (Pireaus, 
Greece, Oct 5-7, 2012) PCI 2012, 290-295. doi: 
10.1109/PCi.2012.38. 

[18] Scott, J., 2000. SNA: A handbook. Second Edition, SAGE 
publications, ISBN0-7619-6339-1, UK.  

[19] Wasserman, S., Faust, 1994. Social Network Analysis: 
Methods and application, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 
0-521-38707-8,UK. 

32





