
 

Learning Object Analytics for Collections, Repositories & 
Federations 

Miguel-Angel Sicilia  
Computer Science Dpt, 

University of Alcalá 
Ctra. Barcelona km. 33.6, 
28871 Alcalá   Henares 

(Madrid), SPAIN 
+34918856640 
msicilia@uah.es 

Xavier Ochoa 
Electric and Computing 

Engineering Faculty, CTI - 
Information Technology 

Center, Escuela Superior 
Politécnica del Litoral 

Campus "Gustavo Galindo" 
Km. 30.5 Via Perimetral 

Guayaquil, Ecuador 
+593-4-2269773 

xavier@cti.espol.edu.ec 

Giannis Stoitsis 
Agro-Know Technologies, 

Grammou 17, 15235 
Vrilissia, Athens, Greece 

+302106897905 
stoitsis@ieee.org 

Joris Klerkx 
Department of Computer 

Science, University of 
Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 
200a - box 2402 3001 

Heverlee, Leuven, Belgium 
+32 16 3 27060 

joris.klerkx@cs.kuleuven.be 

  
ABSTRACT 
A large number of curated digital collections containing learning 
resources of a various kind has emerged in the last year. These 
include referatories containing descriptions for resources in the 
Web (as MERLOT), aggregated collections (as Organic.Edunet), 
concrete initiatives as Khan Academy, repositories hosting and 
versioning modular content (as Connexions) and meta-aggregators 
(as Globe and Learning Registry). Also, OpenCourseware and 
other OER initiatives have contributed to making this ecosystem 
of resources richer. Very interesting insights can be extracted 
when studying the usage and social data that are produced within 
the learning collections, repositories and federations. At the same 
time, concerns for the quality and sustainability of these 
collections have been raised, which has lead to research on quality 
measurement and metrics. The Workshop attempts to bring 
studies and demonstrations for any kind of analysis done on 
learning resource collections, from an interdisciplinary 
perspective. We consider digital collections not as merely IT 
deployments but as social systems with contributors, owners, 
evaluators and users forming patterns of interactions on top of 
portals or through search systems embedded in other learning 
technology components. This is in coherence of considering these 
social systems under a Web Science approach 
(http://webscience.org/). 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.2.8 [Database Applications] Data mining; J.1 
[Administrative Data Processing] Education 

General Terms 
Measurement, Design, Experimentation 

 

Keywords 
Learning repositories, Analytics, Metadata, Social Data 

 

1. WORKSHOP FORMAT 
The Workshop aims to be an interactive, engaging experience that 
will motivate participants to get involved and start fruitful 
discussions on both research but also practical topics around 
learning analytics over digital content collections. It will include a 
short presentation of issues, solutions and cases, with demo in 
some particular cases and few enlightening presentations. The 
intention of the workshop will be that of fostering and promoting 
the creation of some sort of shared space between the participants 
and beyond regarding the specifics of digital collection analytics, 
metrics and associated tools. 

2. DURATION 
Half-day. 9th of April 2013 

3. SELECTION PROCESS 
The selection of presentations will be done on the basis of the 
relevance to the workshop topics, following the review process. 
Contributions will be sought in the following topics: 

• Requirements for the collection of analytics in 
Repositories and Federations 

• Frameworks for aggregation and sharing LO analytics 

• Metrics for LO focused but not limited to social data, 
language, size, quality, growth, history and cultural 
awareness 

• Approaches to address big data problems in collecting 
analytics 

• Tools for the browsing and visualization of LO analytics 

• Transfer of successful algorithms and systems from 
other application areas 

• Innovative services and systems for learners and 
curators based on LO analytics 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
LAK '13, April 08 - 12 2013, Leuven, Belgium 
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04...$15.00. 
 

285



 

• Models for the representation of LO analytics 

• Data mining methods to extract of meaningful 
information from data collected regarding LOs 

• Experiences from actual implementation of LO 
analytics in collections, repositories and/or federations 

All submissions will be evaluated by at least two reviewers from 
an international Program Committee that will be set up for this 
purpose. In addition, the call for contributions will also seek 
expressions of interest for system demos: the idea is to give the 
floor to teams already working on collection and repository 
analytics to provide a demo of their running systems through a 
“Demo Marketplace”, during which participants will be able to 
walk around the room, watching the system demos and discussing 
with the system developers. This session is expected to run during 
one of the breaks of the Workshop. The Workshop is expected to 
end with a small ceremony for giving a best paper award. 

4. PROMOTING ACTIVITIES 
A separate Workshop Web site was set up, continuously updated 
with new information and outcomes. The call for contributions 
was regularly promoted through all major mailing lists that are 
related to technology enhanced learning, SoLAR, educational 
collections, and learning repositories’ research.  The Workshop 
will be particularly promoted to the CIP PSP Open Discovery 
Space project (www.opendiscoveryspace.eu), the Learning 
Registry network (http://www.learningregistry.org), and to the 
ARIADNE Foundation (www.ariadne-eu.org) and GLOBE 
(www.globe-info.org) members since they are planning their 
plenary meetings in collocation to LAK 2013. 

5. DISSEMINATING RESULTS 
All presentations from Workshop participants will be made 
available online through the Workshop Web site and/or 
Slideshare. Papers will be published as CEUR Workshop 
Proceedings. In addition, authors of accepted papers will be 
invited to submit an extended version of their papers for post-
publication at a Special Issue of some relevant journal. 

6. BIOGRAPHIES 
Prof. Miguel A. Sicilia obtained a University degree in Computer 
Science from the Pontifical University of Salamanca in Madrid, 
Spain (1996), a degree in Information and Library Science from 
the University of Alcala (2010) and a PhD from Carlos III 
University in Madrid, Spain (2002). Currently, he works as a full-
time professor at the Computer Science Dept. He is head of the 
Information Engineering Research Unit (www.ieru.org), a high 
productivity R&D group and mediator, with an emphasis on 
engineering Information Systems in the organizational context. He 
has extensive experience in ontology engineering, Semantic Web 
development, learning technology, social network analysis, 
machine learning, soft computing and empirical approaches to 
Software Engineering. He has been the Organizer of the 1st 
International Workshop of Ontology and Epistemology for 
Software and Systems Engineering (ONTOSE 2005), and co-

organizer in its followups (next one in 2013 collocated with 
CAiSE); the main main organizer of the Metadata and Semantics 
Research Conference (MTSR’05, MTSR’07, MTSR’09, 
MTSR’10, MTSR’11, MTSR’12). He is serving as an Editor in 
Chief of the International Journal on Metadata Semantics and 
Ontologies and of Program-Electronic Library and Information 
Systems. He is also a member of the Editorial Board of Interactive 
Learning Environments. 

Prof. Xavier Ochoa is a Principal Professor at the Faculty of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering at Escuela Superior 
Politécnica del Litoral (ESPOL) in Guayaquil, Ecuador. He 
coordinates the research group on Teaching and Learning 
Technologies at the Information Technology Center (CTI) at 
ESPOL. In addition, he is coordinating the Latin American 
Community on Learning Objects (LACLO) and organizing the 
LACLO Conference. He is a member of the Executive Committee 
of the Society for Learning Analytics Research (SOLAR). He is 
involved in the coordination of the Ariadne Foundation.  Also 
directing the Center for Development and Support of ARIADNE 
at Guayaquil.  He represents LACLO at the Global Learning 
Objects Brokered Exchange (GLOBE) consortium.  His main 
research interests revolve around Learning Analytics (measuring 
learning to help teachers and students), Infometrics (measuring 
the production and consumption of information in different areas), 
and Learning Technologies (using technologies to improve the 
learning process). 

Dr. Giannis Stoitsis received the Diploma of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering from the Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki in 2002, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degree in 
Biomedical Engineering from the University of Patras in 2004 and 
2007, respectively. He has been previously affiliated with the 
Biomedical Simulations and Imaging (BIOSIM) Laboratory of the 
National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), Greece. His 
research interests include biomedical image processing, medical 
informatics, computer-aided diagnosis, and web engineering. He 
is one of the founders and the Technology Director of Agro-Know 
Technologies (http://www.agroknow.gr) and responsible for the 
coordination of research & development activities related to 
technologies for learning repositories and bioinformatics 
applications.  

Dr. Joris Klerkx is a post-doctoral research expert at the 
Computer Science department of the Katholieke Universiteit 
Leuven. His research interests include user experience design (i.e. 
information-visualisation, HCI, multi-touch, mobile devices), 
learning analytics, quantified self and data visualisation. and 
flexible access to a global learning infrastructure based on open 
standards in general. Joris has previously coordinated the research 
on educational content discovery in the MACE, ASPECT and 
ICOPER eContentplus projects, and is currently involved in the 
EU FP7 projects STELLAR, ROLE, in the INTERREG IVa 
project EMuRgency and in the IWT-SBO project PARIS. 

 
 

 

286





