Large Scale Predictive Process Mining and Analytics of  University Degree Course Data  Jurgen Schulte1, Pedro Fernandez de Mendonca1,   Roberto Martinez-Maldonado2, Simon Buckingham Shum2   University of Technology Sydney - Faculty of Science (SciMERIT)1, Connected Intelligence Centre2    P.O. Box 123, Ultimo 2007, Australia  (Jurgen.Schulte, Pedro. FernandezdeMendonca, Roberto.Martinez-Maldonado, Simon.BuckinghamShum)@uts.edu  ABSTRACT For students, in particular freshmen, the degree pathway from  semester to semester is not that transparent, although students  have a reasonable idea what courses are expected to be taken each  semester. An often-pondered question by students is: "what can I  expect in the next semester More precisely, given the  commitment and engagement I presented in this particular course  and the respective performance I achieved, can I expect a similar  outcome in the next semester in the particular course I selected  Are the demands and expectations in this course much higher so  that I need to adjust my commitment and engagement and overall  workload if I expect a similar outcome Is it better to drop a  course to manage expectations rather than to (predictably) fail,  and perhaps have to leave the degree altogether Degree and  course advisors and student support units find it challenging to  provide evidence based advise to students. This paper presents  research into educational process mining and student data  analytics in a whole university scale approach with the aim of  providing insight into the degree pathway questions raised above.  The beta-version of our course level degree pathway tool has been  used to shed light for university staff and students alike into our  universitys 1,300 degrees and associated 6 million course  enrolments over the past 20 years.     CCS Concepts  Applied computing --- Enterprise computing --- Enterprise modelling   Computing methodologies --- Modelling and simulation --- Simulation types and techniques --- Visual analytics   Keywords Process mining; learning analytics; predictive modeling;  educational data mining, educational process visualization.   1. INTRODUCTION Learning is a pathway, comprising the main actors (students,  academics), events (courses) and outcomes (marks), which in a  degree occur in a designed sequence, within a limited timeline. As  cohorts of students pass through courses to complete a degree,  their performance varies, depending on their academic ability and  how well they study. However, the swiftness with which they  progress also depends on how well individual courses are taught,   how well courses are aligned horizontally as well as vertically,  and how well sequences of courses are placed within the degree  course structure. Naturally then, the degree structure has two  views and two related goals; students desire to pass through a  degree in an optimized way (maximum academic performance,  minimum time) and universities commitment to deliver the best  mix of disciplinary knowledge within degree time limits while  maintaining acceptable retention rates.   Degree performance is monitored by both university business  units and degree coordinators. From a business unit perspective  the degree input-output performance (level and rate of intake, and  graduation) and the retention rate are key degree performance  indicators. The degree coordinator has the faculty or school  interest in view, that is, teaching of disciplinary knowledge ought  to have ideal scaffolding so that a student at an initially accepted  entry level has a fair opportunity to pass through the degree,  following a recommended degree pathway, at an appropriate pace.  Ideally, the degree coordinator has intimate knowledge of the  material being taught in each course, and how disciplinary  knowledge and skills learned in one semester are further  developed in the following semester. Often though, this kind of  course level overview is difficult to achieve.   Attempts to mine educational processes of student cohorts so far  have been limited to small cohorts, such a single small degree  course of a few hundred students or sub-major of such degree [1].  There has been mixed success in extracting meaningful insights  through educational process mining [2], one of the major  obstacles being the volume of student data, even when limiting  datasets to sub-cohorts of degree courses. Other challenges  encountered have been profound heterogeneity and complexity  within datasets and concept drifting [3]. All this together make it  difficult interpret the outcome and diminishes the value of  intelligence that can be drawn from it   Our goal was to uncover statistically significant and meaningful  patterns in students course pathway choices, and to provide  student support units, degree and course coordinators with  longitudinal indicators that could be used to inform student  advice. The envisioned indicators could also help to support the  streamlining of course and subject content. The hypothesis is that  the more effectively students can be informed about what effort it  could take them (individually) to master future subjects and stages  in their course, the better their study experience will be, with  better student retention rates.   2. METHODOLOGY Student enrollment performance and progression data were  provided by the UTS Warehouse and Business Intelligence  division following required security and ethics clearance (UTS  HREC REF NO. ETH16-0338).   Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that  copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights  for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other  uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029446      Figure 1: Data and process mining system layout.   The dataset allowed us to mine historical data of 1,300 UTS  degree courses and some 16,000 course units taken by over  300,000 students in over 6 million enrolments. To our  knowledge, this makes it the largest educational progression  pathway study undertaken so far. We employed data and  process mining approaches [3], using tools such as KNIME,  Disco and PRoM (see [2,3] for details), data modelling in R,  and RStudios Shiny server for visualization and end user  access (Figure 1) to demonstrate a proof of concept of a  virtually real-time comprehensible presentation of complex  processes in large scale educational data.   3. DISCUSSION  It became apparent that the data would present challenges to the  envisaged process mining techniques. Firstly, students may repeat  courses, choose electives offered by different degrees, change  degrees or take time off to come back some later time (Figure 2).  The process mining with PRoM and analysis with Disco lead to  rather convoluted processes and an inflated number of processes  resulting in a difficult to interpret spaghetti diagram.     Figure 2: Simplified representation of degree complexity.    Boxes represent different courses in a degree, and colors the  faculties/schools by whom they are offered. Line thickness   represents a relative measure of student flow density.   Secondly, with a 6 million enrolments in the dataset, it was  inevitable for it to contain irregularities, as well as display  historical drift as degree and course names changed (Figure 3).  Education relies on innovation and re-inventing itself as society  evolves and expectations change.      Figure 3: Example of degree and concept drift. Of the six courses  (A to F) in Degree A one changes its name in year 2 (E1 E2),   Degree A then changes its name in year 3 to Degree B while  largely maintaining its overall structure, followed by further   course evolutions.   Process mining is particularly sensitive to such concept drift, but  in education, this is common, and indeed, often desirable for  courses to evolve. We found that these drift and process  complexity issues caused an almost exponential escalation in the  computing time required to extract meaningful sequences. Hence,  it is perhaps not surprising that educational process mining has to  date confined itself to small data samples and proof of principle  studies.   Consequently, we employed a heterogeneity and drift resilient  data mining and analytics approach. We employed KNIME to  interrogate the data for categorizable structure, drift sources and  patterns, and data wrangling for the production of a conveniently  accessible database for the statistical analytics tool (R). This  permitted process visualisation directly from raw data and scaled  well.  Even with the whole university dataset, this approach  permitted virtually real-time, interactive interrogation and  visualization, of both vertical and lateral degree course pathways  by a range of customers, e.g., students, student support units,  degree planners, course coordinators (Figure 4).   4. CONCLUSION  While originally promising, 20 years data on course pathways  proved intractable for conventional process mining, but was  amenable to pre-structured statistical analytics, with  implementation of an interactive querying and visualization tool.  The project is now preparing to extend the historical cohort data  representation to multistep (upward semester) forward projections  and forecasting. This will serve then as a base for the development  of meaningful degree health and course choice indicators.      Figure 4: Snapshot of cohort course pathway   predictor window of the real-time mining tool.   A following pilot with academics and university support units will  assist us to assess the tools potential to provide new insights into  progression choices, levels of success, and meaningfulness of  pathway indicators. Ultimately, our hope is to provide direct  guidance to students.   5. REFERENCES  [1] C. Romero,  S. Ventura, Educational data science in massive   open online courses, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data  Mining and Knowledge Discovery,  2016.   [2] Pea-Ayala, A. 2014, 'Educational data mining: A survey and  a data mining-based analysis of recent works', Expert Systems  with Applications, vol. 41, no. 4 PART 1, pp. 14321462    [3] A. H. Cairns, B. Gueni, M. Fhima, A. Cairns, S. David,  N.  Khelifa, Process Mining in the Education Domain,  International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol.  8 (1&2), pp. 219-233, 2015.   } } }  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Degree Code A Degree Code B  F1  E1  D1  C1  B1  A1  F1  E2  D1  C1  B1  A1  F2  E2  D1  C1  B2  A1  F3  E3  D2  C1  B3  A1  F3  E4  D2  C1  B3  A2  F3  E4  D2  C1  B4  A2  Years      