Visualizing semantic space of online discourse: The Knowledge Forum case  Bodong Chen University of Toronto  252 Bloor St W, Suite 9-118, IKIT Toronto, Canada  bodong.chen@utoronto.ca  ABSTRACT This poster presents an early experimentation of applying topic modeling and visualization techniques to analyze on- line discourse. In particular, Latent Dirichlet Allocation was used to convert discourse into a high-dimensional semantic space. To explore meaningful visualizations of the space, Lo- cally Linear Embedding was performed reducing it to two- dimensional. Further, Time Series Analysis was applied to track evolution of topics in the space. This work will lead to new analytic tools for collaborative learning.  Categories and Subject Descriptors I.2.7 [Natural Language Processing]: Text analysis; K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: Collaborative learning  General Terms Algorithms, Experimentation, Measurement  Keywords Discourse Analysis, Text Mining, Semantic Analysis, LDA, Knowledge Building, Collaborative Learning  1. INTRODUCTION Online discussion platforms have been widely applied to  support collaborative learning from K-12 to tertiary educa- tion. As the usage has grown, so has the need for effective tools to interpret and facilitate online discussion. In this area has emerged a rich body of leaning analytics research that turns online discourse data into insights about collab- orative learning. A variety of tools have since been devel- oped to tackle important aspects of online discourse, ranging from social interactions to temporal patterns [1, 3]. Among these studies, analysis of textual information has been a con- stant focus, as written language dominates communication in most online dialogues. Text miningthe process of ex- tracting interesting patterns from text documents [9]has  Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third- party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. LAK 14, Mar 24-28 2014, Indianapolis, IN, USA ACM 978-1-4503-2664-3/14/03...$15.00. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567574.2567595  been identified as one of the most widely applied techniques in educational data mining [5]. Combined with visualiza- tion techniques, patterns revealed by text mining could be used to re-present online discussion in meaningful ways to promote collaboration and reflection [4].  Research of Knowledge Building (KB), a social construc- tivist pedagogy engaging learners to collectively advance knowledge through communal discourse [8], has maintained a long-standing interest in analyzing online discussion. Knowl- edge Forum [7], the most widely used KB environment, is implemented with a suite of assessment tools to interpret and facilitate KB discourse [10]. Because of KBs emphasis on communal discourse, the evolution of public community knowledge has been a key concern of KB analytics. The major analytic questions in this area include: What is the state of community knowledge Is the discourse effective in advancing knowledge Where is the community discourse heading The present study represents a recent experimen- tation to analytically tackle these questions. Applying topic modeling and visualization techniques, it attempts to ex- plore meaningful ways to represent online discourse to pro- mote reflection and metadiscourse. Results will contribute to an ongoing Knowledge Forum rebuild with new means of representing knowledge to facilitate idea improvement.  2. SUMMARY OF PRELIMINARY RESULTS Building on prior work, the present study aims to apply  text mining and visualization techniques to achieve the fol- lowing goals: (1) to model semantic space of KB discourse focusing on its emergent topics or discussion themes, (2) to visualize interpreted semantic space and inspect roles of different variables (e.g., time, students, and views) in KB discourse, and (3) to track student participation in different discussion themes over time.  To achieve these goals, I experimented with a range of techniques using a well-documented Knowledge Forum dataset. This dataset was produced by a Grade 4 class when they were studying a science unit Light. This dataset contains 308 notes from six views,1 with names such as How Light Travels,Colours of Light, and Shadows.  To achieve the first goal of modeling semantic space, La- tent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), a probabilistic topic-modeling technique [2], was applied on this dataset. A list of topics were identified, turning discourse into a high-dimensional semantic space represented by topics. For each topic, its  1In Knowledge Forum, students post ideas to their commu- nity in the form of notes, which can be conceptually orga- nized in a view to serve idea improvement.  271    Figure 1: Visualizing notes by topics and views.  probabilistic associations with terms are computed, mak- ing it possible for interpretation. For example, one topic was mostly associated with word stemsmirror, look, angl, and bouncand so was clearly about reflection. At the same time, each notes probabilistic memberships of topics were also calculated, so popularity of a topic could be approximated by the count of associated notes.  To visually represent topic modeling results, I further re- duce the modeled high-dimensional space into two dimen- sions. Locally Linear Embedding, which is thought to be su- perior to multidimensional scaling [6], was applied to achieve this goal. Notes could then be visualized by different vari- ables, such as topics, views, timestamps, and students, to explore usefulness of different visualizations. For instance, Figure 1 maps notes by topics and views. Given further assistance with interpretation, users could use this visual- ization to identify interested topics in each view and con- nect semantically related but physically isolated ideas across views.  Finally, I applied time series analysis to trace develop- ment of topics. By tracking participation in each topic across time, knowledge development of different topics becomes vis- ible. Figure 2 presents the results of the top five topics. Ac- cording to this figure, different topics had their rises and falls. For example, the beginning of the discourse mostly focused on how light travels, while refraction and re- flection dominated the end. Sources of light and light and materials were discussed throughout the unit, while the other three topics had their own golden times.  In summary, the present study seeks to advance current learning analytics of online discourse by providing new means of interpreting and visualizing knowledge. It will inform de- velopment of new Knowledge Forum analytic tools empha- sizing development of community knowledge. Broadly, it contribute to the important area of group-level, discourse- centric analytics focusing on the social aspect of learning.  3. REFERENCES [1] A. Bakharia and S. Dawson. SNAPP. In Proceedings  of the 1st International Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge - LAK 11, page 168, New York, New York, USA, 2011. ACM Press.  [2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. The Journal of Machine Learning  Figure 2: Evolution of the top five semantic topics.  Research, 3:9931022, Mar. 2003.  [3] G. Dyke, R. Kumar, H. Ai, and C. Rose. Challenging assumptions: Using sliding window visualizations to reveal time-based irregularities in CSCL processes. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson, and P. Reimann, editors, The future of learning: Proceedings of the 10th international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2012) - Volume 1, Full Papers, pages 363370. ISLS, Sydney, Australia, 2012.  [4] J. Oshima, R. Oshima, and Y. Matsuzawa. Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social network analysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational Technology Research and Development, June 2012.  [5] C. Romero and S. Ventura. Educational data mining: A survey from 1995 to 2005. Expert Systems with Applications, 33(1):135146, July 2007.  [6] S. T. Roweis and L. K. Saul. Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding. Science (New York, N.Y.), 290(5500):23236, Dec. 2000.  [7] M. Scardamalia. CSILE/Knowledge Forum. In A. Kovalchick and K. Dawson, editors, Education and technology: An encyclopedia, pages 183192. ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara, CA, 2004.  [8] M. Scardamalia and C. Bereiter. Knowledge building. In J. W. Guthrie, editor, Encyclopedia of education, volume 17, pages 13701373. Macmillan Reference, New York, NY, 2 edition, 2003.  [9] A.-H. Tan. Text mining: The state of the art and the challenges. In Proceedings of the PAKDD 1999 Workshop on Knowledge Disocovery from Advanced Databases, pages 6570, 1999.  [10] C. Teplovs, Z. Donoahue, M. Scardamalia, and D. Philip. Tools for Concurrent, Embedded, and Transformative Assessment of Knowledge Building Processes and Progress. In Proceedings of the 8th iternational conference on Computer supported collaborative learning, pages 721723, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA, 2007. International Society of the Learning Sciences.  272      