
Relevance of Learning Analytics to Measure and Support 
Students’ Learning in Adaptive Educational Technologies 

Maria Bannert 
Technical University of Munich 

Arcisstrasse 21 
Munich, Germany 
+49 89 289 24390 

maria.bannert@tum.de 

Inge Molenar 
Radboud University 
Montessorilaan 3 

Nijmegen, The Netherlands 
+31 24 3611942 

I.molenaar@pwo.ru.nl 

Roger Azevedo 
North Carolina State University 

2310 Stinson Drive  
Raleigh, NC, 27519, USA 

+1 919 515 2254 
razeved@ncsu.edu 

 
Sanna Järvelä 
University of Oulu 
P.O.BOX 2000, 

FIN-90014 University of Oulu 
+35 8405 77 7164 

sanna.jarvela@oulu.fi 

Dragan Gaševi? 
The University of Edinburgh  

10 Crichton Street 
Edinburgh, EH8 9AB, UK 

+44 131 651 3837 
dragan.gasevic@ed.ac.uk 

ABSTRACT 
In this poster, we describe the aim and current activities of the 
EARLI-Centre for Innovative Research (E-CIR) “Measuring and 
Supporting Student’s Self-Regulated Learning in Adaptive Educa-
tional Technologies” which is funded by the European Association 
for Research on Learning and Instruction (EARLI) from 2015 to 
2019. The aim is to develop our understanding of multimodal data 
that unobtrusively capture cognitive, meta-cognitive, affective and 
motivational states of learners over time. This demands for a con-
certed interdisciplinary dialogue combining findings from psycho-
logy and educational sciences with advances in computer sciences 
and artificial intelligence. The participants in this E-CIR are leading 
international researchers who have articulated different emerging 
perspectives and methodologies to measure cognition, metacognit-
ion, motivation, and emotions during learning. The participants re-
cognize the need for intensive collaboration to accelerate progress 
with new interdisciplinary methods including learning analytics to 
develop more powerful adaptive educational technologies. 

CCS Concepts 
Algorithms, Experimentation, Human Factors, Standardiza-
tion, Theory, Verification.  

Keywords 
Adaptive Educational Technologies; Educational Data Mining; 
Learning Analytics; Multimodal Data; Self-Regulated Learning 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Even though the recent influx of tablets with learning technologies 
in education is promising, the challenge lies in improving adaptive 
educational technologies to support students’ self-regulated learn-
ing. These technologies offer immediate individualized instruction 

including personalized feedback from real-time data of learner ac-
tions and performance. Driven by the emerging field of learning 
analytics, these technologies seek to tailor learning experiences 
based on learners’ progress through the measurement, collection, 
analysis and reporting of multi-modal cognitive, metacognitive, af-
fective, and motivational data. 

Current adaptive educational technologies focus on students' per-
formance (cognition) to adapt learning materials and largely neg-
lect important aspects, such as students’ metacognition, emotion 
and motivation. However, multimodality online trace data such as 
log-files, eye gaze behaviours, transpiration, facial expressions of 
emotions, heart rate and electro-dermal activity can enhance our 
understanding of students’ processes during learning [1]. For ex-
ample, eye gaze data reveals the learners’ focus at different points 
of time and is indicative of the level of cognitive load. Measure-
ment of transpiration, heart rate and skin galvanic conductivity re-
veals emotional reactions. More specifically, combining multi-
modal data can reveal both cognitive and affective states of the 
learner and can detect arousal levels and the valence of emotional 
reactions. In a learning situation, students are confronted with a va-
riety of cognitive challenges (e.g. lack of prior knowledge, task dif-
ficulty) which can result in emotional reactions (e.g. frustration, 
boredom). Therefore, this cooperation aims to develop our under-
standing of multimodal data that unobtrusively capture cognitive, 
metacognitive, affective and motivational states of learners over 
time in order to design adequate instructional support and scaffolds.  

2. NEED OF COMPLEMANTARY EXPER-
TISE AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
Valid online-measures of multimodal data during learning and their 
analysis demand for a concerted interdisciplinary dialogue com-
bining findings from psychology and educational sciences with 
advances in computer sciences and artificial intelligence. The par-
ticipants in this E-CIR are leading international researchers who 
have articulated different emerging perspectives and methodolo-
gies to measure cognition, metacognition, motivation and emotions 
during learning. The participants recognize the need for intensive 
collaboration to accelerate progress with new interdisciplinary 
methods to develop more powerful adaptive educational technolo-
gies which would not be possible within individual labgroups. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact 
the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029463  



To guide our E-CIR, we outlined two research questions which are 
also highly relevant in the field of learning analytics: 

1. How can we analyze multimodal, trace data from existing 
adaptive educational technologies using different channels 
(e.g., verbalization, phsysiology, navigation behavior) to 
measure students' cognitive, metacognitive, emotions and 
motivation during learning? 

2. How can these measurements be used to enhance current 
adaptive learning technologies supporting learners’ self-regu-
lated learning through visualisation and recommendation 
tools? 

3. E-CIR RESEARCH ACTIVITIES 
Our research questions will be addressed in regular meetings where 
we present and discuss research of individual members and plan 
collaborative research projects in order to investigate the research 
topics as a joint effort among lab groups (see Table 1).  

Table 1. Overview of E-CIR Activities 

Focus Issues 
Review of existing methods 

for trace and multimodal-data 
collection and analysis 

Specifying different channels 
(e.g. eye-tracking, physio- 

logical) and methods (e.g. pro-
cess-mining, video-analysis) 

Consolidation of methods Analyzing each other’s datasets 
Multiple data-streams Discussing approaches to 

multiple data-streams 
Application in education Visualization of data for learners 

and teachers 
Multiple data-streams Sharing of results and planning 

new publications 
Application in education Recommendation services 

Standardization of methods Discussing different settings 
Research agenda for next  

decade 
Outline remaining research  

issues 
 
The meetings will be informed by research of each team members 
and will stimulate their future research cooperation. For example, 
Bannert et al. [2] are using process mining techniques to analyse 
verbal protocols collected during self-regulated learning. Espe-
cially, they are interested if instructional scaffolds affect not only 
the amount of different SRL activities but also the temporal struc-
ture and if so, whether the temporal structure of learning events 
corresponds with different dimensions of learning performance. 

Molenaar’s group studies time and order in self and socially regu-
lated learning using single or multiple data streams. Specifically, 
sequential characteristics of S-SRL consider which actions follow 
each other, for example planning was shown to play a critical role 
in transitions between low and high cognitive activities [3]. Tem-
poral characteristics indicate when those actions are taken during 
learning and how actions fluctuate other over time. For example, 
successful learners are more likely to engage in metacognitive ac-
tivities early in the learning process compared to less-successful 
learners. Recently, this group has begun to analyze logs of adaptive 
technologies to assess students’ regulation of effort and learning 
over extended time periods.  

Azevedo [1] and colleagues’ research has focused on examining the 
role of cognitive, metacognitive, affective, and motivational 
(CAMM) self-regulatory processes during learning with advanced 
learning technologies. More specifically, the overarching research 
goal has been to understand the complex interactions between hu-
mans and intelligent learning systems by using interdisciplinary 

methods (e.g., log-files, physiological sensors, facial expressions of 
emotions, etc.) to measure CAMM processes and their impact on 
learning, performance, and transfer. To accomplish this goal, his 
team conducts laboratory, classroom, and in-situ (e.g., medical sim-
ulator, construction site) studies and collect multi-channel data to 
develop models of human-computer interaction; examines the na-
ture of temporally unfolding self- and other-regulatory processes 
(e.g., human-human and human-artificial agents); and, designs in-
telligent learning and training systems to detect, track, model, and 
foster learners, teachers, and trainers’ self-regulatory processes. 

Järvelä et al. [4] have been exploring what multimodal data can tell 
us about SRL processes in authentic collaborative learning tasks. 
They have investigated how multichannel data can be used for iden-
tifying markers that characterize successful SRL and learning pro-
gress and help in understanding and increasing the evidence about 
(a) interactions between different facets of regulation (i.e., cogni-
tion, motivation, emotion) (b) temporality and cyclical processes of 
regulation, and (c) the occurrence and temporality of different types 
of regulation (SRL, CoRL, and SSRL). 

Finally, Gaševi? and his colleagues [5] have been working on ana-
lytical methods for the theory-informed study of self-regulated 
learning. Their work involves a broad range of methods for analysis 
of clickstream, discourse, and more recently psychophysiological 
data. Data are generated in learning activities performed in labora-
tory experiments and ecologically valid and open-ended learning 
environments including flipped classrooms and (massive open) 
online courses. The methods are based on unsupervised and super-
vised machine learning, sequence and process mining, automated 
text analysis, and social and epistemic network analysis. The use of 
these methods allows for detection of a) learning strategy; b) cog-
nitive, metacognitive, motivational, social, and affective processes; 
and c) interaction between different self-regulatory processes. To 
allow for triangulation with psychophysiological data collected 
typically as continuous data streams, methods for time series anal-
ysis and digital signal processing will be explored in the future 
work. 

4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Our thanks to EARLI for funding our E-CIR. 

5. REFERENCES  
[1] Azevedo, R., Taub, M., & Mudrick, N.V. (2017). Using 

multi-channel trace data to infer and foster self-regulated 
learning between humans and advanced learning technolo-
gies. In D. Schunk & Greene, J.A (Eds.), Handbook of self-
regulation of learning and performance (2nd ed.). New York, 
NY: Routledge.  

[2] Bannert, M., Reimann, P., & Sonnenberg, C. (2014). Process 
mining techniques for analysing patterns and strategies in 
students' self-regulated learning. Metacognition and Learn-
ing, 9(2), 161-185.  

[3] Molenaar, I., & Chiu, M.M. (2014). Dissecting sequences of 
regulation and cognition: Statistical discourse analysis of pri-
mary school children’s collaborative learning. Metacognition 
and Learning, Vol 9(2), 137-160. 

[4] Järvelä, S., Malmberg, J., Sobocinski, M., Haataja, E., & 
Kirschner, P. (2016). What multimodal data tell about self-
regulated learning process? Submitted.  

[5] Gaševi?, D., Dawson, S., & Siemens, G. (2015). Let’s not 
forget: Learning analytics are about learning. TechTrends, 
59, 1, 64-71.



