
A Process Mining Approach to Linking the Study of  
Aptitude and Event Facets of Self-regulated Learning

Sanam Shirazi Beheshitha 
School of Interactive Arts and 

Technology 
Simon Fraser University 

Burnaby, Canada 
sshirazi@sfu.ca  

Dragan Gaševi? 
School of Computing Science 

Athabasca University 
Athabasca, Canada 

dgasevic@acm.org

Marek Hatala 
School of Interactive Arts and 

Technology 
Simon Fraser University 

Burnaby, Canada  
mhatala@sfu.ca 

 
 

ABSTRACT 
Research on self-regulated learning has taken main two paths: 
self-regulated learning as aptitudes and more recently, self-
regulated learning as events. This paper proposes the use of the 
Fuzzy miner process mining technique to examine the relationship 
between students’ self-reported aptitudes (i.e., achievement goal 
orientation and approaches to learning) and strategies followed in 
self-regulated learning. A pilot study is conducted to probe the 
method and the preliminary results are reported. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.1[Computers and Education] Distance Learning 

General Terms 
Human Factors, Measurement 

Keywords 
Self-Regulated Learning, Clustering, Learning Patterns, Process 
Mining 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Existing research on self-regulated learning has taken two main 
paths: self-regulated learning as aptitudes and more recently, self -
regulated learning as events [1]. Aptitudes are theoretical 
constructs underlying the observed differences between individual 
learners in specific contexts such as motivational factors, learning 
styles and epistemic beliefs [2]. They provide as the basis of 
standards that students use to regulate their learning. More 
specifically, they influence how learners metacognitively monitor 
and then control their learning by enacting certain cognitive 
tactics and strategies in action. Self-reported questionnaire is a 
common method of measuring aptitudes. 
Self-regulated learning can also be conceived in terms of events, 
the actual actions learners execute rather than underlying mental 
states that is caused by them [3]. Recent advances in technology-
enhanced learning enables for capturing fine-grained trace data of 
learners’ actions in online learning environments. Investigating 
occurrence, temporal sequence or regular patterns of events that 

are products of learners’ cognitive activities and strategies allows 
for tracing aptitudes in practice [1]. 
Several studies looked at occurrence and sequence of self-
regulated learning actions using the concordance analysis [4], 
activity transition graph [5] and sequence mining [6]. It is argued 
that self-regulated learning behaviors, although weakly 
sequenced, can be assumed to be driven by an underlying holistic 
model [1]. A recent study introduced adoption of process mining 
techniques to uncover regular patterns governed by the holistic 
process [7]. The reported study examined differences in the self-
regulated learning process of successful and less successful 
students. 

1.1 Aptitude Measures 
In this paper, we specifically focus on the two aptitude measures: 
achievement goal orientation and approaches to learning. 
Achievement goal orientation is a common motivational construct 
which describes "the purpose of engagement in an achievement 
behavior" [8]. Mastery goal orientations focus on the development 
of task competence, whereas performance goal orientations 
emphasize on the illustration of performance competence [9] 
(with respect to self or others [10]). In terms of valence, these 
achievement goals may be further distinguished by approaching 
success and avoiding failure in a certain competence [11]. Prior 
research has examined association of achievement goal 
orientations with self-regulated learning behaviors and strategies 
mostly through self-report instruments measuring constructs such 
as strategy use [12] or learning outcome [13]. 
Another aptitude construct describes students' preferred 
approaches to learning for a specific task, in a particular teaching 
context with respect to two dimensions – motives and strategies 
[11]. Surface study approaches have a preference towards rote 
learning which is motivated by failure avoidance. Whereas, deep 
approaches have an orientation towards comprehending and sense 
making with intrinsic motivation [14]. Relevant literature, has 
investigated influence of personal and context factors on study 
approaches [15], as well as how study approaches affect learning 
outcome and processes through self-report questionnaires [16].  

1.2 Research Questions 
To our best knowledge, in the context of self-regulated learning, 
process mining techniques have not yet been applied to identify 
learning patterns with respect to different aptitudes (e.g., 
achievement goal orientations and study approaches). This study 
uses process mining to examine the relationship between students' 
self-reported aptitudes and how they self-regulate their learning in 
action. More specifically, we aim to address the following 
questions: 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org.  
LAK '15, March     16 - 20, 2015, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA  
Copyright 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-3417-4/15/03 $15.00  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723628 

265



? Can we identify groups of students with similar self-reported 
study approaches/achievement goal orientations? 

? Do groups of students with different self-reported study 
approaches/achievement goal orientations follow different 
learning strategies and perform different study activities?  

To probe a research method that can address the above research 
questions, we carried out a pilot study with undergraduate 
students who were asked to conduct a research project and write 
an essay in an online tool for self-regulated learning.  

2. METHOD 
2.1 Participants 
Participants were third year undergraduate students of an 
interdisciplinary Interactive Arts and Technology program (n=22) 
at a research-intensive university in Canada (Female:27%, 
Male:73%; Age 18 to 24: 14%, 25 to 34: 86%).  

2.2 Course and Learning Task 
The study was conducted in the context of a course dedicated to 
internet computing technologies. The course was mainly about the 
software development with XML and Web 2.0 technologies. 
Students' learning was assessed through several assignments, 
quizzes, final exam and a research project. 
As a learning task within this study, the students were asked to 
perform an independent research project on the topic of their 
choice and write a report in the length of 1200-1500 words. The 
outcome was evaluated in terms of writing, structure, quality of 
sources and argumentation and was worth 5% of their final grade. 
Participation in the study was voluntary and a bonus of 3% 
counted towards the final grade was offered in return for 
participation. The participants were asked to fill out several 
questionnaires and submit those electronically prior to the 
learning task. Then, they were asked to use the nStudy tool [17] to 
perform their research and write a report. The students were 
introduced to nStudy during a lecture session and were advised to 
use it on their own and seek help if needed. 

2.3 Instruments 
The R-SPQ-2F instrument was adopted to evaluate students 
approaches to study [14]. It is composed of 20 items, grouped into 
4 sub-scales corresponding to study approaches dimensions 
(surface motive, surface strategy, deep motive, and deep strategy). 
The students gave responses on a Likert-type scale, from 1 (never 
or only rarely true of me) to 5 (always or almost always true of 
me). Out of all students, 20 completed this questionnaire. 
The 3×2 AGQ instrument was also used to investigate students 
achievement goals [10]. It consists of 18 items, grouped into 6 
categories corresponding to achievement goals (task-approach, 
task-avoidance, self-approach, self-avoidance, other-approach, 
and other-avoidance), whereby self and task represent mastery 
goals and other represents performance goals. The responses were 
recorded on a Likert-type scale, from 1 (not at all true of me) to 7 
(very true of me). Nineteen students completed this questionnaire. 

2.4 nStudy Tool 
nStudy is a learning tool offered as a Firefox add-on. It is 
primarily designed to help learners organize and process 
information as they self-regulate their study of online materials 
(Figure 1) [17]. It also captures log data of learners’ activities 
within the environment. A summary of all learning activities is 
provided in Table 1. 

In this study, participants were asked to use nStudy within their 
research project to bookmark and organize online resources, 
highlight and quote key points, take notes, define terms and write 
the final report document. Time-stamped trace data of 
participants' interaction with nStudy was collected for analysis. 
Twenty students used nStudy for their research project. 

 
Figure 1. nStudy Tool 

2.5 Analysis 
To address the research questions, the following analysis were 
conducted. First, clustering was adopted on questionnaires' results 
to identify groups of participants based on similarity of scores on 
goal orientation and study approaches questionnaires' scales. 
Given the small size of dataset, agglomerative hierarchical 
clustering algorithm was used with Euclidian distance measure 
and Ward’s criterion. 
Further, the trace data logged by nStudy was analyzed on two 
levels: 

? Learning Strategy: Coarse-grained coding based on cognitive 
self-regulated learning strategies – Rehearsal, Organization, and 
Elaboration – was done based on the framework introduced in 
[18]. Rehearsal strategies that involve repetition and revisit of 
studied resources have lowest cognitive demand (e.g., Create 
Quote, Expand Note or Switch to Bookmark). However, 
Organization strategies which emphasize on changing the 
structure of information and studied resources (e.g., Include 
Note or Edit Folder Title), require higher cognitive processing. 
Finally, Elaboration strategies, the most cognitive demanding 
strategies, focus on activities that modify or transform studied 
information (e.g., Create Term or Edit Document Content). The 
complete list of nStudy learning activities and corresponding 
learning strategy codes is presented in Table 2. 

? Learning activity: Fine-grained coding based on nStudy 
learning activities (actions performed on a certain nStudy 
object). 

Given the characteristics of the dataset, the Fuzzy miner algorithm 
was used for process mining. Inspired by the metaphor of maps, 
Fuzzy miner was proposed for exploratory process mining of 
complex, less-structured data based on four principles [12]: 1) 
Aggregation of low-level details and displaying it as one cluster, 
2) Abstraction of low-level information which is not significant in 
a particular context, 3) Emphasis on significant information, 4) 
Customization of level of details based on particular context and 
purpose. 
Once the Fuzzy miner algorithm is performed on a sequence of 
coded events, the output process model was a simplified 
descriptive transition diagram. Within this diagram, nodes 
illustrated event classes and directed edges displayed the 
relationships between the event classes. 

266



Table 1. nStudy Learning Activities 

Action nStudy Object Learning Activity Description 
Create All Artifacts*, Chat Generate a new instance 
Delete All Artifacts, Chat Delete an existing instance 
Permanently Delete All Artifacts, Chat Delete an existing instance permanently 
Undelete All Artifacts, Chat Undo deletion of an existing instance 
Edit Content Document, Note, Quote, Term, Chat Modify content text of an object 
Edit Title All Artifacts Modify title text of an object 
Expand All Artifacts, All System Components+ Open on the sidebar tree structure 
Collapse All Artifacts, All System Components Close on the sidebar tree structure 
Include All Artifacts Include as child of other components 

on the sidebar tree structure 
Exclude All Artifacts Exclude child from parent components 

on the sidebar tree structure 
Switch To Bookmark, Webpage, nStudy Page Switch the active page 

              Note. A learning activity is referred to an action applied on an nStudy object. 
                             *(User-generated) Artifacts: Bookmark, Document, Folder, Note, Quote and Term. 
                             +System Objects: Chat, (root) Collection (of folders), History (of Bookmarks) and Trash 
 
In order to implement above principles, two fundamental metrics 
were used: 

? Significance: It measures relative importance of an event class 
(Unary Significance) or a relationship (Binary Significance). 

? Correlation: It is used for relationships (Binary Correlation) 
and computes "how closely related two events following one 
another are" [12, p.333]. 

 
Table 2. Mapping nStudy learning activities to self-regulated 

learning strategies 

Learning Activity Learning 
Strategy 

Code Action nStudy Object 

Create Bookmark/Quote Rehearsal 
Create Document/Folder Organization 
Create Note/Term Elaboration 
Delete (any applicable) object Organization 
Undelete (any applicable) object Organization 
Permanently 
Delete 

(any applicable) object Organization 

Edit Content Note/Quote/Term/Document Elaboration 
Edit Title Bookmark/Document/Folder/Note Organization 
Edit Tile Term Elaboration 
Expand (any applicable) object Rehearsal 
Collapse (any applicable) object Rehearsal 
Include (any applicable) object Organization 
Exclude (any applicable) object Organization 
Switch to Bookmark/Webpage Rehearsal 
Switch to nStudy Page Remove 
 
Then the following steps were applied to simplify process model 
according to the principles: 

? Edge Filtering: If utility of an edge is below a configured 
threshold then the edge is removed from the output model. The 
utility of an edge is computed as the weighted sum of Binary 
Significance and Binary Correlation. The weight is called 
Utility Ratio: 

Util=UtilRatio* BinSig + 1-UtilRatio *(BinCorr) 

? Node Filtering and Aggregation: If utility of a node is below a 
configured threshold then the node is either removed or 
clustered with other nodes as follows: 1) Low utility nodes with 
low Binary Correlation are removed. 2) Low utility nodes with 
high Binary Correlation are clustered together. The utility of a 
node is equal to Unary Significance. 

The following parameter settings were used in our process mining 
analysis: Significance and Correlation were computed based on 
the frequency and routing measures for Unary, the frequency and 
distance measures for Binary, and the temporal proximity for 
Correlation [12]. The significance cut off for the node filter was 
set to 0.25. The edge Utility Ratio was fixed at 0.75. The edge cut 
off was set to 0 for the Learning Strategy level and 0.2 for 
Learning Activity level. 

3. RESULTS 
Trace files included 6758 interactions of 20 participants generated 
over the period of 3-9 study sessions each lasting 20-120 minutes. 
In total, 718 artifacts were produced using nStudy (Table 3).  
 

Table 3. Descriptive statistics of nStudy artifacts produced 

nStudy Artifact M SD Total
Quote 15.5 14.28 310 
Bookmark 13.2 7.22 264 
Folder 2.15 2.6 43 
Term 2.05 2.95 41 
Document 1.7 1.26 34 
Note 1.25 1.71 25 

 

3.1 Cluster Analysis 
The result of cluster analysis revealed two clusters based on the 
study approaches. As presented in Table 4, these two clusters (i.e., 
Surface Learners and Deep Learners) had significantly different 
scores on the surface and deep approach scales. However, no 
significant difference was found in the nStudy variables 
describing the use of different functionalities. 
Clustering based on the achievement goal orientation scale scores 
did not yield satisfactory results as the difference between 
valences of same competence were not salient within a cluster. 

267



Thus, no further analysis of the learning strategy and learning 
activities was possible using process mining.  

 
Table 4. Cluster analysis result based on study approach 

scale scores 

Variable Cluster 1: 
Surface Learners 

Cluster 2: 
Deep Learners 

t-test 

 M SD M SD (t-value)
Surface Ap 0.67 0.70 -0.86 0.54 -5.32***
Deep Ap -0.51 0.99 0.63 0.58 3.02** 

 N=18; Surface Learners (n=10); Deep Learners (n=8); 
 **p<.01, ***p<.001 
 

3.2 Process Mining 
Figure 2 shows the resulting model with events coded on the 
Learning Strategy level. Rehearsal strategies had the highest 
utility in both models. Deep Learners (Figure 2, b) manifested a 
slightly higher utility of Elaboration strategies and a lower utility 
of Organization strategies than Surface Learners (Figure 2, a). 
In addition, Surface Learners demonstrated more transitions 
between strategies. Both models show a one-way loop from 
Rehearsal to Elaboration, then to Organization and at last back to 
Rehearsal. However, for Surface Learners there is an additional 
strong transition from Organization to Elaboration.  
Process mining at Learning Activity level did not uncover 
substantial differences between the two groups of learners. 
 

 
Figure 2. Process model of Surface Learners (n=10) and Deep 
Learners (n=8) at learning strategy level. The numbers in the 

nodes indicate unary significance and the numbers on the 
edges represent binary significance (upper) and binary 

correlation (lower). 
 

4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Cluster analysis on aptitude questionnaire subscales identified two 
clusters based on study approaches (i.e., Deep Learners and 
Surface Learners). This is aligned with findings of a previous 
study by Bliuc et al. who identified two groups of students based 
on approaches to online and face-to-face learning, as well as 

conceptions of learning and academic performance [19]. 
According to their findings, one group of students aimed for 
deeper understanding, whereas the other group was concerned 
with reproduction to complete the learning task. 
Process mining on the interactions of each group with nStudy 
revealed a slightly higher utility of Elaboration strategies for Deep 
Learners and a slightly higher utility of Organization strategies 
for Surface Learners. Generally, Deep Learners have orientation 
towards deeper understanding and less memorization. Hence, their 
strategy around self-study involves higher cognitive processing of 
new information [14]. This is assumed to be a probable reason for 
the higher utility of Elaboration strategies, which demand the 
highest amounts of cognitive processing. In addition, the higher 
number of edges in the process model of Surface Learners is 
indicative of a more frequent use of learning strategies. It seems 
that Deep Learners were more selective in their use of strategy 
than Surface Learners, which aligns with prior research showing 
that effective learners with on-track solutions to the task adopt 
strategies more effectively rather than more frequently. Hence, 
they exhibit less actions and complex patterns [20]. 
Higher temporal proximity correlation observed in the process of 
Surface Learners is an indication of shorter time interval between 
subsequent switches in strategy use than Deep Learners. This 
could mean that Deep Learners spend more time applying a 
strategy of a certain type before switching to another, particularly 
Elaboration (e.g., editing content of a document, note or definition 
of a term) and Rehearsal strategies (e.g., highlighting important 
materials or reviewing them). Orientation of Deep Learners 
towards meaning seeking can serve as the underlying reason for 
this additional time [14]. An alternative explanation according to 
the Winne and Hadwin model of self-regulated learning is that 
Deep Learners deliberate after using a cognitive strategy to 
metacognitively monitor the learning progress against learning 
goals and objectives and control their learning by planning 
adjustments to future cognitive operations and strategies [21]. 
Our findings suggest that process mining techniques are useful for 
exploratory analysis of self-regulated learning data. They can 
uncover sequential and temporal relationships that are not 
otherwise observable through conventional methods of analysis. 
However, they do not provide causal explanations. In the case of 
fuzzy miner, the output is a descriptive transition diagram and 
therefore, cannot be subjected to a statistical significance test. 
Hence, significance of any observed difference between output 
models of the two groups of students cannot be statistically 
confirmed [7].  
Several limitations might have affected both external and internal 
validity of the findings. 
First, the small sample size might have affected the statistical 
power. Moreover, with small number of cases, minor changes in 
parameter configuration of process mining result in considerable 
variations in the output process model. 
Second, the study did not cover a separate learning session where 
students can familiarize themselves with the tool at hand before 
the actual experiment. Therefore, trace data includes both the 
learning phase and actual testing phase which might have 
influenced the accuracy of findings since students did not have 
sufficient time to regulate their tool use [22].  
Third, post-study surveys about students’ experience with the tool 
uncovers moderately low tool acceptance. Technical issues and 
low usability of the tool had negatively affected the perceived 
ease of use (M= 2.05 of 5). Two students withdrew from using the 

268



tool halfway through the study. Further interviews with one of the 
participant revealed low perceived usefulness in comparison to 
similar available tools [23]. 
Fourth, students' self-reports of their aptitudes through close-
ended questionnaires are not necessarily accurate. Very often 
responses are influenced by cognitive illusions, such as prior 
experience, and are not tuned to the learning task at hand [24]. In 
addition, students' aptitudes can change over the course of an 
experiment. Surveys fail to capture temporal shifts [1], 
particularly with study approaches where additional factors such 
as teaching and task context have high influence [14]. 
Despite these limitations, our methodology suggests a new venue 
for analysis of learning strategies and processes followed in self-
regulated learning. Investigating a temporal sequence of events, 
which is assumed to be governed by a learning process, is in 
agreement with theoretical models for self-regulated learning [25]. 
The proposed method needs to be validated with larger sample 
sizes than the one in the present study and with alternative 
measures of aptitudes such as the trace data-based measures of 
achievement goal orientation as suggested by Zhou and Winne 
[26].  

5. REFERENCES 
[1] P. H. Winne, “Improving measurements of self-regulated 

learning,” Educ. Psychol., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 267–276, 
2010. 

[2] R. E. Snow, “Aptitude-treatment interaction as a 
framework for research on individual differences in 
psychotherapy.,” J. Consult. Clin. Psychol., vol. 59, no. 2, 
p. 205, 1991. 

[3] P. H. Winne, “Issues in researching self-regulated learning 
as patterns of events,” Metacognition Learn., pp. 1–9, 
2014. 

[4] F. De Jong, “Task and student dependency in using self-
regulation activities: Consequences for process-oriented 
instruction,” Process-Oriented Instr. Verbal Pict. Aid 
Comprehension Strateg., pp. 87–99, 1994. 

[5] A. F. Hadwin, J. C. Nesbit, D. Jamieson-Noel, J. Code, and 
P. H. Winne, “Examining trace data to explore self-
regulated learning,” Metacognition Learn., vol. 2, no. 2–3, 
pp. 107–124, 2007. 

[6] M. Kapur, J. Voiklis, and C. K. Kinzer, “Sensitivities to 
early exchange in synchronous computer-supported 
collaborative learning (CSCL) groups,” Comput. Educ., 
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 54–66, 2008. 

[7] M. Bannert, P. Reimann, and C. Sonnenberg, “Process 
mining techniques for analysing patterns and strategies in 
students’ self-regulated learning,” Metacognition Learn., 
pp. 1–25, 2014. 

[8] A. J. Elliot, A. J. Elliot, and C. S. Dweck, “A conceptual 
history of the achievement goal construct,” Handb. 
Competence Motiv., vol. 16, pp. 52–72, 2005. 

[9] C. Ames, “Classrooms: Goals, structures, and student 
motivation.,” J. Educ. Psychol., vol. 84, no. 3, p. 261, 
1992. 

[10] A. J. Elliot, K. Murayama, and R. Pekrun, “A 3$\times$ 2 
achievement goal model.,” J. Educ. Psychol., vol. 103, no. 
3, p. 632, 2011. 

[11] J. B. Biggs, Student Approaches to Learning and Studying. 
Research Monograph. ERIC, 1987. 

[12] K.-L. Lau and J. Lee, “Examining Hong Kong students’ 
achievement goals and their relations with students’ 
perceived classroom environment and strategy use,” Educ. 
Psychol., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 357–372, 2008. 

[13] L. Linnenbrink-Garcia, D. F. Tyson, and E. A. Patall, 
“When are achievement goal orientations beneficial for 
academic achievement? A closer look at main effects and 
moderating factors,” Rev. Int. Psychol. Soc., no. 1, pp. 19–
70, 2008. 

[14] J. Biggs, D. Kember, and D. Y. Leung, “The revised two-
factor study process questionnaire: R-SPQ-2F,” Br. J. 
Educ. Psychol., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 133–149, 2001. 

[15] M. Baeten, E. Kyndt, K. Struyven, and F. Dochy, “Using 
student-centred learning environments to stimulate deep 
approaches to learning: Factors encouraging or 
discouraging their effectiveness,” Educ. Res. Rev., vol. 5, 
no. 3, pp. 243–260, 2010. 

[16] Z. Akyol and D. R. Garrison, “Understanding cognitive 
presence in an online and blended community of inquiry: 
Assessing outcomes and processes for deep approaches to 
learning,” Br. J. Educ. Technol., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 233–
250, 2011. 

[17] P. H. Winne and A. F. Hadwin, “nStudy: Tracing and 
supporting self-regulated learning in the Internet,” in 
International handbook of metacognition and learning 
technologies, Springer, 2013, pp. 293–308. 

[18] C. E. Weinstein, T. W. Acee, and J. Jung, “Self-regulation 
and learning strategies,” New Dir. Teach. Learn., vol. 
2011, no. 126, pp. 45–53, 2011. 

[19] A.-M. Bliuc, R. Ellis, P. Goodyear, and L. Piggott, 
“Learning through face-to-face and online discussions: 
Associations between students’ conceptions, approaches 
and academic performance in political science,” Br. J. 
Educ. Technol., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 512–524, May 2010. 

[20] J. Malmberg, S. Järvelä, and P. A. Kirschner, “Elementary 
school students’ strategic learning: does task-type matter?,” 
Metacognition Learn., pp. 1–24, 2014. 

[21] P. H. Winne and A. F. Hadwin, “Studying as self-regulated 
learning,” Metacognition Educ. Theory Pract., vol. 93, pp. 
27–30, 1998. 

[22] G. Lust, J. Elen, and G. Clarebout, “Regulation of tool-use 
within a blended course: Student differences and 
performance effects,” Comput. Educ., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 
385–395, 2013. 

[23] V. Venkatesh and F. D. Davis, “A theoretical extension of 
the technology acceptance model: four longitudinal field 
studies,” Manag. Sci., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 186–204, 2000. 

[24] R. A. Bjork, J. Dunlosky, and N. Kornell, “Self-regulated 
learning: Beliefs, techniques, and illusions,” Annu. Rev. 
Psychol., vol. 64, pp. 417–444, 2013. 

[25] P. H. Winne and J. C. Nesbit, “Graph theoretic techniques 
for examining patterns and strategies in students’ studying: 
An application of LogMill,” in Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association, San 
Francisco, 1995. 

[26] M. Zhou and P. H. Winne, “Modeling academic 
achievement by self-reported versus traced goal 
orientation,” Learn. Instr., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 413–419, 
2012. 

 
 

 

269





