
Visual Analytics in Support of Education 
Katy Börner 

Cyberinfrastructure for Network Science Center 
School of Library and Information Science 

Indiana University 
1320 E. 10th Street, Bloomington 

IN 47405 
USA 

+1 812-855-3256 

katy@indiana.edu 

 

ABSTRACT 
The amount of data about us and our world is increasing rapidly, 

and the capability to analyze large data sets—so-called big 

data—becomes a key basis of competition, underpinning new 

waves of productivity growth and innovation. The big data 

phenomenon is fueled by cheap sensors and high-throughput 

simulation models, the increasing volume and detail of 

information captured by enterprises, the rise of multimedia, 

social media, and the Internet. It exists from social media to cell 

biology offering unparalleled opportunities to document the inner 

workings of many complex systems [1].  Research by MGI and 

McKinsey's Business Technology Office argues that there will be 

a shortage of talent necessary for organizations to take advantage 

of big data. “By 2018, the United States alone could face a 

shortage of 140,000 to 190,000 people with deep analytical skills 

as well as 1.5 million managers and analysts with the know-how 

to use the analysis of big data to make effective decisions” [2].  

In everyday life, people deal with large amounts of data 

regularly: online search engines provide access to millions of 

web sites almost instantly; consumer sites offer literally 

thousands of purchase options seamlessly; and social media sites 

let you create and benefit from extensive social networks.    

In bestselling books like Freakonomics, Super Crunchers and 

The Numerati, authors illuminate how more and more decisions 

in health care, politics, education, and other sectors utilize big 

data and data analysis [3]. The texts highlight the growing need 

for specialists and every-day citizens to be able to understand 

and interpret data. Whether it is a table of nutritional 

information, a graph of stock prices, or a chart comparing health 

care plans, the skills of understanding and interpreting data are 

necessary to navigate successfully through daily life. 

This talk starts with a review of visual analytics projects that aim 

to increase our understanding of how people learn, increase the 

efficacy of learning environments, or support decision making in 

education [4]. The second part of the talk provides a theoretical 

framework for the design of effective data analysis workflows 

and insightful visualizations. It also introduces plug-and-play 

macroscope tools [5], see also http://cishell.org, that were 

designed for different research communities and are used by 

more than 120,000 users from 40+ countries to design and 

benefit from visualizations of complex data.    

The talk concludes with a discussion of challenges that arise 

when visual analytics tools are introduced to classrooms and 

informal science education.  

Keywords 
data mining, information visualization, visual analytics, 

education, macroscopes 

BIOGRAPHY 
Katy Börner is the Victor H. Yngve Professor of Information 

Science at the School of Library and Information Science, 

Adjunct Professor at the School of Informatics and Computing, 

Adjunct Professor at the Department of Statistics in the College 

of Arts and Sciences, Core Faculty of Cognitive Science, 

Research Affiliate of the Biocomplexity Institute, Fellow of the 

Center for Research on Learning and Technology, Member of the 

Advanced Visualization Laboratory, and Founding Director of 

the Cyberinfrastructure for Network Science Center at Indiana 

University.  She is a curator of the Places & Spaces: Mapping 

Science exhibit. Her research focuses on the development of data 

analysis and visualization techniques for information access, 

understanding, and management. She is particularly interested in 

the study of the structure and evolution of scientific disciplines; 

the analysis and visualization of online activity; and the 

development of cyberinfrastructures for large scale scientific 

collaboration and computation.  She is the co-editor of the 

Springer book on ‘Visual Interfaces to Digital Libraries’ and of a 

special issue of PNAS on ‘Mapping Knowledge Domains’ 

(2004).  Her new book ‘Atlas of Science: Visualizing What We 

Know’ by MIT Press was published in 2010. She holds a MS in 

Electrical Engineering from the University of Technology in 

Leipzig, 1991 and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from the 

University of Kaiserslautern, 1997. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work benefits from discussions and collaboration with 

Adam V. Maltese, Indiana University; Joe E. Heimlich, Center of 

Science and Industry, Columbus; Stephen Uzzo, New York Hall 

of Science; Paul Martin, Science Museum of Minnesota; Sasha 

Palmquist, Institute for Learning Innovation.  

 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. 

LAK’12, 29 April– May 2, 2012, Vancouver, BC, Country. 
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1111-3/12/04 …$10.00. 

2



REFERENCES 
[1] Barabási, A.-L. 2011. The network takeover. Nature 

Physics. 8: 14-16. 

[2] The McKinsey Global Institute. 2011. Big data: The next 

frontier for innovation, competition, and productivity. 

McKinsey & Company. 

http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/Research/Technolo

gy_and_Innovation/Big_data_The_next_frontier_for_innova

tion 

[3] Thomas, J.J. and Cook, K.A. (Eds.). 2005.  Illuminating the 

Path: The Research and Development Agenda for Visual 

Analytics. IEEE Press. 

[4] Börner, K. 2010. Atlas of Science: Visualizing What We 

Know. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  

[5] Börner, K. 2011. Plug-and-Play Macroscopes. 

Communications of the ACM, 54(3), 60-69. 

 

 

3





