
English Language Learner Experiences of Formal and 
Informal Learning Environments   

Carrie Demmans Epp 

Learning Research and Development Center (LRDC), University of Pittsburgh  

3939 O'Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America 

cdemmans@pitt.edu 

 

ABSTRACT 
Many people who do not know English have moved to English-
speaking countries to learn English. Once there, they learn 
English through formal and informal methods. While considerable 
work has studied the experiences of English language learners in 
different learning environments, we have yet to see analytics that 
detail the experiences of this population within formal and 
informal learning environments. This study used the experience 
sampling methodology to capture the information that is needed to 
detail the communication and affective experiences of advanced 
English language learners. The collected data reveals differences 
in how English language learners perceived their communication 
success based on their learning context, with higher levels of 
communicative success experienced in formal learning settings. 
No such differences were found for learners’, highly negative, 
affect. The data suggest a need for additional emotional support 
within formal and informal learning environments as well as a 
need for oral communication support within informal contexts.      

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
•Human-centered computing ? Human computer interaction 
(HCI); HCI design and evaluation methods; Field studies; 
•General Reference ? Cross-computing tools and techniques – 
Measurement; 

Keywords 
Experience sampling methodology (ESM), communication, affect, 
informal learning, formal learning, language learning, analytics 

1. INTRODUCTION 
English is recognized as a world language and that of 
international business. This elevated status has contributed to the 
development of an English-language learning marketplace and 
increased educational tourism for the purpose of developing one’s 
proficiency. These English language learners (ELL) and those 
who have immigrated to English speaking countries are trying to 
improve their knowledge but are falling behind [17].  

The experiences of ELLs within classroom settings [7] and their 
performance on high stakes or other assessments [17] have been 
explored. Historically, these assessments have evaluated reading, 
writing, and listening. More recently, these assessments have 
included ELLs’ speaking ability [11]. However, these assessments 
do not typically measure the learner’s ability to converse. As a 
result, the literature cannot inform our understanding of ELLs’ 
ability to communicate in the variety of situations that they 
encounter [7]. Moreover, there has been little work exploring 
ELLs’ experiences of their everyday lives or that details their 
experiences across learning contexts (i.e., formal and informal). 
This work, therefore, details ELLs’ ability to communicate and 
their affective experience based on their learning context, which 
has yet to be done in spite of recognition for the role that affect 
and communication play in language learning [25,27]. This work 
was performed with an understudied population [19]: advanced 
ELLs who are living in an English language environment because 
they participate in educational tourism that allows them to partake 
in a variety of informal language-learning activities.  
To detail how advanced ELLs’ communication and affective 
experiences differ based on their learning context, a form of self-
reporting called the experience sampling methodology (ESM) 
[15,23] was used. ESM enabled the collection of detailed data 
about learner experiences from a variety of formal and informal 
learning contexts that included their courses and shopping centres.  
This data allows ELLs’ communication and affective experiences 
to be compared across formal and informal learning contexts. This 
comparison shows that ELLs’ experienced similarly high negative 
affect in both contexts, indicating that these ELLs need additional 
emotional support in all learning environments. In contrast to 
their consistently high negative affect, learner communicative 
success differed significantly by context: ELLs achieved their 
communication goals more when they were in formal learning 
environments than when speaking with those they encountered in 
their everyday lives. This difference may be due to a variety of 
reasons, including higher levels of speaker cooperativeness or 
familiarity with the type of language that is used in class. The 
lower communication success rates that were reported in informal 
learning environments indicate that ELLs need additional 
communication support in everyday settings.  

2. ANALYTICS IN LANGUAGE 
LEARNING  
Many of the approaches that aim to improve education or assess 
learning are not typically evaluated across educational contexts 
[1]. When interventions have been evaluated more broadly, their 
evaluation has relied on simple metrics of learner actions that can 
be easily logged through a learning system [8], or it has been 
highly qualitative with little use of analytics. When more complex 
analytics are used within tutoring environments, they have 

 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
LAK '16, April 25 - 29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed 
to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883896 



focused on learner mastery of language knowledge and skills [10]. 
This focus may be the result of the ease with which these types of 
analyses can be performed and the difficulty of capturing data in 
more complex real world settings. Regardless of the reason behind 
the lack of analytics work that studies learners’ experiences in 
more complex settings [8], there is a need to begin applying an 
analytics lens to these less instrumented learning environments so 
that we can inform praxis in these complex, less controlled spaces. 
The need for analytics in language learning is even more 
pronounced, with explicit calls for additional work in this area 
[4,21] since analytics from the areas of high-stakes and formal 
testing or intelligent tutoring systems have yet to describe how 
ELL experiences and outcomes, which includes their affective 
states and communication with others, are related. 

2.1 Communication 
Current language-learning theories argue that the production (e.g., 
writing or speaking) portion of communication serves three 
purposes: it enables reflection about our language use and 
knowledge, allows us to notice shortcomings in our knowledge, 
and allows us to test our hypotheses about how the language 
should be used [25]. This production of language can take place 
during the learner’s everyday activities, during their language 
courses, or when they are using technologies such as discussion 
forums or online games. However, communication is rarely 
assessed over the variety of contexts in which it can occur [7] and 
few of the technology-enhanced environments that aim to scaffold 
language learning support open-ended speech [3] unless the 
technology has been repurposed to support interactions between 
the learner and a peer or instructor (e.g., email or Skype). This 
lack of instrumentation in authentic communication scenarios 
means that the communication experiences of ELLs have been 
inadequately explored. It also means that analytics have yet to be 
performed on these rich learning opportunities, which limits our 
ability to understand these environments, improve language 
assessment, and improve the supports that we provide to learners. 

2.2 Affect 
A substantial body of work with respect to how learner affect 
influences their actions and outcomes within the constrained 
environment of intelligent tutoring systems has emerged [2,20]. 
This work continues to grow and uses a variety of methods to 
capture information about learner affect. These methods include 
self-reporting [5,15], observer coding [2], sentiment analysis [30], 
and the use of physiological sensors [16]. Almost none of this 
work has been performed with language learners. It is more 
common to see the development of models that predict learner 
affect or its role on varied outcome measures within other learning 
domains [2,30]. This lack of analytics around affect’s role within 
language learning is inconsistent with the theoretical 
argumentation for the importance of affect to language learning.  
The common view of affect within language learning states that a 
learner must be open to learning for learning to occur [18]. 
Research into the role of various affective states within language 
learning shows that learner anxiety hinders learning whereas self-
confidence and motivation enable learning [12,27]. However, 
these affective states have been operationalized in different ways. 
This lack of agreement and systematic investigation into ELLs’ 
affective states across contexts limits our understanding of the 
role that affect plays within language learning. A far more 
nuanced understanding of ELLs’ affective experiences is needed.  

This study, therefore, aims to detail the communicative and 
affective experiences of advanced ELLs across learning contexts. 

3. METHODOLOGY 
3.1 ESM: Communication and Affect 
Experience sampling (ESM) is a self-report method [15]. It aims 
to discover and represent people’s experiences through their eyes. 
It has been used to evaluate ubiquitous technologies [6] by having 
users complete regular reports that detail varied perceptual and 
contextual information [15]. ESM is commonly used to collect 
information about the participant’s affective state and social or 
geographical context [15,23]. In keeping with this tradition, 
information about participants’ social context (i.e., who they were 
with and where they were), affective state, and perceived 
communicative success were collected. This information was 
gathered through an android application (see [13] for details).  

Two established scales were used to measure participants’ 
affective state. The first is the international short form of the 
positive and negative affect schedule (I-PANAS-SF) [28] and the 
second is the 5-point version of the self-assessment manikin 
(SAM) [24]. These two measures were used to complement one 
another because the SAM, which is a pictographic semantic-
differential scale, had not been validated cross-culturally and the 
I-PANAS-SF requires knowledge of the adjectives that describe 
one’s affective state. The SAM asks users to select the picture that 
best depicts how they feel. These pictures are mapped to a 5-point 
rating scale, where 1 is highly negative and 5 is highly positive. 
The I-PANAS-SF asks respondents to rate the extent to which 
they feel a particular descriptor on a 5-point scale, where 1 is 
Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree. It was possible that 
participating ELLs might not have sufficient knowledge of the 
vocabulary used within the I-PANAS-SF, which is why the SAM 
was also used. Following the I-PANAS-SF and SAM, participants 
were asked to explain why they felt the way that they did. 

Participants were asked about the number of communication 
attempts that they had made in a single day and how successfully 
they thought that they had communicated across all of those 
events. Participants’ perceptions of their communicative success 
were collected using a slider (0 = not at all successful, 100 = 
completely successful). Participants were also asked to report on 
specific communication events. The specific communication 
events that participants reported on were their most recent 
attempts at communicating using English when signaled. 
Participants could not control when they were asked for this 
information and they were asked to report on their most recent 
attempt to communicate in English twice per day. In addition to 
asking participants for their perceived communicative success 
from their most recent attempt at communication, they were 
asked, “What were you trying to communicate?”.  

To ensure that participants were reporting on their experiences 
from varied contexts, signal-contingent sampling was used. 
Participants were asked to complete a self-report questionnaire 
when signaled. To enable this sampling, participants’ waking 
hours were subdivided into 6 segments. Participants were then 
signaled at a random time within each segment. Once signaled, a 
participant could complete the provided self-report form or post-
pone reporting. If a participant postponed reporting he or she was 
re-signaled 30 minutes later unless the sampling window had 
expired. For example, the first signal for a participant who wakes 
up at 7 am and goes to sleep at 11 pm would occur at some point 



between 7 am and 9:40 am. Were that signal to be postponed at 
9:30 am, the participant would not be allowed to provide that 
information. If the participant were to postpone a 7:10 am signal, 
s/he would have up to 5 additional opportunities to complete the 
form. Information about participants’ affect was collected at 3 
time points and information about their communicative success 
was collected at 2 time points throughout the day. The sixth 
sampling period collected participants’ reflection of their 
experiences over the course of the day. This reflective data is 
reported. However, it cannot inform our understanding of how 
learner communication and affective experiences differ between 
formal and informal learning contexts. Only the momentary 
reports can help answer this question. The daily reflective reports 
are, therefore, used to inform the interpretation of the differences 
that were observed using participants’ momentary reports.  

3.2 Other Data Collection 
The perceived competence scale (PCS) [9] was modified to 
measure ELLs’ sense of self-efficacy with respect to their ability 
to learn English and their ability to communicate using English.  
Semi-structured interviews were conducted to elicit information 
about participants’ learning activities, the technologies they had 
used, and their communication experiences. The interviews also 
provided a venue to clarify the content of the reports that were 
submitted as part of the experience sampling process.  

3.3 Participants 
Recently arrived international students were recruited through an 
academic English training program in a major North American 
city. Twelve ELLs consented to participate. However, P12 (a 23 
year old speaker of Kazakh and Uygur) submitted too few self-
reports so her data was excluded. The remaining 11 participants (5 
- female, 6 - male) had an average age of 22.82 years (SD = 4.98). 
P10 spoke Arabic, P9 spoke Kazakh, and the other 9 spoke 
Portuguese as their mother tongue. Participants had been in an 
English environment between 3 and 10 months, and 5 of them 
(P1, P5, P6, P9, P10) lived in homes where more than one 
language was spoken.  

The participants whose data was used completed 73.18% of the 
reports on average (SD = 11.24) and received 71.67 dollars on 
average (SD = 14.26): this amount consisted of 20 dollars for 
returning the data-collection device and 0.50 dollars per submitted 
sample up to a maximum of 100 dollars.   

3.4 Study Context 
Data was collected from two contexts. The first was the 
participants’ academic English courses (i.e., their formal learning 
environment). These courses used a communicative approach to 
language learning where students read papers and presented a 
topic from their discipline to the class who then questioned the 
presenter. The second context was the city in which participants 
lived (i.e., their informal learning environment). This city 
provided many opportunities for communication in English and 
ensured continued exposure to English-language media.  
Participants were signaled regardless of where they were or what 
they were doing. They were instructed not to provide pictures 
from private locations, such as the bedroom or bathroom, if they 
were in these types of locations when they were signaled. 
Participants reported data when they were at home, shopping, 
interacting with friends, or using public transportation. 

4. RESULTS 
The results detailing participants’ affective and communication 
experiences are based on the 218 daily reflective self-reports and 
966 momentary self-reports that were collected through the ESM 
application. The interview data indicate that signals were ignored 
when participants were in the bathroom (P11), had dirty hands 
(P9), were fighting with a significant other (P11), sleeping (P9), 
or did not hear the signal (P1, P2, P3, P12). They also ignored the 
signal when they felt that responding would break the flow of 
their current activity (P1, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8). 

4.1 Self-Efficacy  
Participant responses to the communication (? = .922) and 
learning (? = .916) versions of the PCS were highly reliable. They 
were also highly correlated (r(22) = .90, p < .001), which 
confirms the strong link between ELLs’ belief in their ability to 
learn and their ability to communicate. Moreover, participant 
responses indicated their confidence in their ability to learn 
English (M = 6.17, SD = 0.91) and their ability to communicate 
using English (M = 5.84, SD = 1.02). 

4.2 Communication 
The daily self-reports show that participants experienced days 
when they did not communicate in English and days when they 
communicated extensively using English. These high 
communication days, while infrequent, were characterized by 
ELLs’ participation in activities that depended on communication 
with others. For example, giving presentations in class, going 
shopping, or volunteering at local schools. However, it was far 
more common for participants to only speak with  others in 
English when absolutely necessary, with participants reporting a 
median of 10 communication attempts per day (IQR = 12).  
Similar to the amount of communication reported, participants 
experienced complete communication success and failure. Their 
communicative success was typically quite high (Mdn = 90.50%, 
IQR = 19.00) and there was a weak relationship between the 
number of times that ELLs tried to communicate and their ability 
to communicate successfully (r(216) = .26, p < .001). There was 
also a weak relationship between the number of times that they 
tried to communicate and their daily I-PANAS-SF (r(216) = .22, p 
= .001) scores (see section 4.3 Affect). 
Of the 401 samples of momentary communicative success, 108 
were taken from formal learning contexts and 293 from informal 
contexts. Participants reported an average success rate of 86.98% 
(SD = 15.27) when in class and 81.78% (SD = 20.30) when 
outside of class. These reports indicate participants were 
significantly more successful when conversing in formal learning 
environments (t(252.51) = - 2.79, p = .006; F = 17.19, p < .001).  
The interviews revealed that participants relied on the patience of 
their conversational partners and that they employed a variety of 
strategies (e.g., planning and reframing) to mitigate or prevent 
miscommunication before using a technology to overcome 
communication barriers. This decision was influenced by their 
beliefs about the effectiveness of certain tools and by social 
factors: participants did not want to appear rude by consulting 
their mobile phone when in the middle of a conversation. As a 
result, they would only use technological supports when they were 
preparing for an interaction or their other strategies had failed.  
P4, P5, P8, and P10 were frustrated by many people’s speaking 
rate and rapid conversational pace. These speaker attributes made 
it difficult for them to participate in conversation. P8 and P10 also 



Table 1: The number of students who used each technology to 
support their language-learning and communication activities. 

Web Search Dictionary Translator Sub-titles Games Media 
3 11 9 7 7 11 

 

reported that this problem was more pronounced in service 
industry settings where accents introduced additional barriers. 

4.3 Affect 
A total of 565 samples of participants’ momentary affective state 
were collected: 95 came from formal learning environments and 
470 came from informal learning environments. Participant 
responses to the momentary version of the I-PANAS-SF (? = 
.756) were sufficiently reliable and consistent with their responses 
to the SAM (r(563) = .48, p < .001). The daily measures of the I-
PANAS-SF showed a similar relationship with the SAM (r(216)  
= .51, p < .001) and similar reliability (? = .759) to the momentary 
version of this measure. Given these relationships and space 
constraints, only the details of the I-PANAS-SF are reported.  

Participant momentary affect, did not differ significantly (p = 
.544) between informal (M = 35.86, SD = 5.72) and formal (M = 
35.47, SD = 5.44) learning environments.  

Participant responses to the negative subscale of the daily measure 
indicate consistently high levels of negative affect (M = 22.02, SD 
= 3.35): participants’ negative affect score was 1.75 times larger 
than their positive affect score (M = 13.33, SD = 4.83). Ceiling 
effects were also observed for the negative affect subscale of P5, 
P6, P7, P9, and P11. These data indicate that participants were 
continually challenged independent of their learning environment. 
Participant negative affect did not seem to influence their sense of 
self-efficacy or their willingness to engage in learning activities 
that required oral English: both those with ceiling and those with 
lower (P1, P4, P8) negative affect sought opportunities to 
communicate using English.  

4.4 ELL Support Tool Use 
Participants aligned themselves with communicative approaches 
to language learning where they used a variety of mobile 
applications and services that included dictionaries, translators, 
dedicated vocabulary support tools, or Google web and image 
searches (see Table 1) to overcome gaps that they had noticed in 
their knowledge. P1, P7, and P11 provided examples of their 
noticing gaps in their knowledge as the result of trying to 
communicate orally with others using English. Participants also 
reported using these technologies to increase their exposure to 
English by consuming different types of media. The employed 
media included novels, textbooks, online news articles, music, 
television, games, and movies. When engaging in online multi-
player games, participants would listen to others speaking in 
English and communicate in English through the text-based chat 
system, but they reported that the fast-paced nature of the game 
prevented them from participating in oral conversation. 

5. DISCUSSION 
The variability observed in participants’ daily I-PANAS-SF 
positive and negative subscale scores was inconsistent with prior 
work [29]. When the ceiling effects that were observed on the 
negative subscale are considered in conjunction with the stability 
of this measure, it is likely that the expected variability was not 
observed because of the challenges that participating ELLs faced 

on a daily basis. This suggests that their negative affect was so 
high that potential changes were not measurable. These 
experiences imply that ELLs need additional emotional support 
outside of the classroom and that instructor encouragement will 
not fully meet their affective needs.  
The relationship between participant affect and the number of 
communication attempts that they made empirically confirms 
arguments for the inseparability of affect and language learning 
[27]. Similar support for the relationship between learning and 
communication comes from the strong relationship between the 
communication and learning versions of the PCS: one cannot 
communicate through a language without having learned that 
language and communication supports language learning [26]. 
Since only half of the participants sought informal learning 
opportunities, the relationship between participants’ affective 
states and the number of communication attempts they made 
emphasizes the importance of finding ways to encourage ELLs to 
pursue the learning opportunities that are present in their everyday 
lives. These relationships further suggest that interventions which 
encourage effort, bolster affect, or highlight learner successes may 
help increase the likelihood that ELLs will pursue the learning 
opportunities that are part of speaking with others, especially in 
informal contexts. 
The higher success levels that participants experienced when 
communicating in formal learning contexts confirms that ELLs 
struggle with the various forms of English that are used in 
everyday life [14]. This difference also highlights the potential 
relationship between ELLs’ communicative success and the extent 
to which communication partners from each of these learning 
contexts appear to cooperate, with instructors and peers being 
more patient and more willing to take the time and energy to 
negotiate a common understanding. Differences in the nature of 
communication between these learning environments indicates a 
need to support ELL communication, which is further illustrated 
through some ELLs’ reliance on mobile translators or friends and 
family when communicating with others [14]. Differences in 
environmental factors, such as noise and distractions, may also 
play a role in ensuring higher levels of communicative success 
when students are in formal learning environments.  

6. CONCLUSION 
The communication and affective experiences of English language 
learners who are in English-dominant environments could be 
better understood. The experience sampling methodology was 
combined with other measures and interviews to collect self-
report data about ELL experiences. This effort is the first to 
systematically collect data that details the experiences of these 
learners within both formal and informal learning environments. 
Future work could consider the general applicability of the study 
methods to other domains. 
The lack of difference in learners’ affective states between the two 
learning contexts along with their high levels of negative affect 
indicates that they need additional support. This support needs to 
be provided both within the classroom and their everyday lives. 
The differences in learners’ ability to communicate between these 
two contexts indicates a need for the creation of strategies and 
tools that can scaffold language learner communication within 
informal learning environments that are characterized by noise, 
unfamiliar language, and uncooperative communication partners. 
Additional work exploring the nature of these environments and 



that of ELLs’ communication failure will need to be performed in 
order to develop these strategies and tools. 

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author held a Walter C. Sumner Fellowship.  

8. REFERENCES 
[1] Emmanuel G. Blanchard. 2014. Socio-Cultural Imbalances in 

AIED Research: Investigations, Implications and 
Opportunities. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence 
in Education 25, 2: 204–228.  

[2] Nigel Bosch, Sidney D’Mello, Ryan Baker, et al. 2015. 
Automatic Detection of Learning-Centered Affective States in 
the Wild. IUI 2015, ACM Press, 379–388. 

[3] Jack Burston. 2014. The Reality of MALL: Still on the 
Fringes. CALICO Journal 31, 1: 103–125.  

[4] Jack Burston. 2014. MALL: the pedagogical challenges. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning 27, 4: 344–357.  

[5] Lee Anna Clark and David Watson. 1999. The PANAS-X: 
Manual for the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule - 
Expanded Form. Psychology Publications. Retrieved from 
http://ir.uiowa.edu/psychology_pubs/11 

[6] S. Consolvo and M. Walker. 2003. Using the Experience 
Sampling Method to Evaluate Ubicomp Applications. IEEE 
Pervasive Computing 2, 2: 24–31.  

[7] Alister Cumming. 2004. Broadening, Deepening, and 
Consolidating. Language Assessment Quarterly 1, 1: 5–18.  

[8] Shane Dawson, Dragan Gaševi?, George Siemens, and Srecko 
Joksimovic. 2014. Current State and Future Trends: A 
Citation Network Analysis of the Learning Analytics Field. 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on 
Learning Analytics And Knowledge, ACM, 231–240.  

[9] Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan. 2002. Handbook of 
self-determination research. University of Rochester Press, 
Rochester, NY. 

[10] Carrie Demmans Epp and Gordon I. McCalla. 2011. 
ProTutor: Historic Open Learner Models for Pronunciation 
Tutoring. Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED), 
Springer, 441–443.  

[11] Carrie Demmans Epp and Daniel Riccardi. 2013. The 
Speaking Section of the Test of English for International 
Communication (TOEIC). TESL Ontario Contact 39, 61–67. 

[12] L. Quentin Dixon, Jing Zhao, Jee-Young Shin, et al. 2012. 
What We Know About Second Language Acquisition: A 
Synthesis From Four Perspectives. Review of Educational 
Research 82, 1: 5–60.  

[13] Clayton Epp and Carrie Demmans Epp. 2014. MyLog. 
DevCache Consulting, Toronto, Canada. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdemmansepp.com/research/mylog 

[14] Daryl Gordon. 2004. “I’m Tired. You Clean and Cook.” 
Shifting Gender Identities and Second Language 
Socialization. TESOL Quarterly 38, 3: 437–457.  

[15] Joel M. Hektner, Jennifer A. Schmidt, and Mihaly 
Csikszentmihalyi. 2007. Experience sampling method: 
measuring the quality of everyday life. Sage Publications, 
Thousand Oaks, Calif. 

[16] Alicia Heraz and Claude Frasson. 2011. Towards a Brain-
Sensitive Intelligent Tutoring System: Detecting Emotions 

from Brainwaves. Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2011: 1–
13.  

[17] M. J. Kieffer, N. K. Lesaux, M. Rivera, and D. J. Francis. 
2009. Accommodations for English Language Learners 
Taking Large-Scale Assessments: A Meta-Analysis on 
Effectiveness and Validity. Review of Educational Research 
79, 3: 1168–1201.  

[18] Stephen D Krashen. 1982. Principles and practice in second 
language acquisition. Pergamon, Oxford; New York. 

[19] Agnes Kukulska-Hulme. 2013. Re-skilling Language 
Learners for a Mobile World. The International Research 
Foundation for English Language Education (TIRF), 
Monterey, CA, USA. Retrieved from http://www.tirfonline. 
org/english-in-the-workforce/mobile-assisted-language-
learning/re-skilling-language-learners-for-a-mobile-world/ 

[20] Blair Lehman, Sidney D’Mello, and Art Graesser. 2012. 
Confusion and complex learning during interactions with 
computer learning environments. The Internet and Higher 
Education 15, 3: 184–194. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2012.01.002 

[21] Qing Ma. 2013. Computer Assisted Vocabulary Learning: 
Framework and Tracking Users’ Data. CALICO Journal 0, 0: 
230–243.  

[22] Gloria Ramirez, Xi Chen, Esther Geva, and Heidi Kiefer. 
2009. Morphological awareness in Spanish-speaking English 
language learners: within and cross-language effects on word 
reading. Reading and Writing 23, 3-4: 337–358.  

[23] Ulrich Schimmack. 2003. Affect Measurement in Experience 
Sampling Research. Journal of Happiness Studies 4, 1: 79–
106.  

[24] Hyeon-Jeong Suk. 2006. Color and Emotion - a study on the 
affective judgment across media and in relation to visual 
stimuli. Retrieved September 30, 2012 from http://irtel.uni-
mannheim.de/pxlab/demos/index_SAM.html 

[25] Merrill Swain. 1995. Three functions of output in second 
language learning. In Principles and Practice in Applied 
Linguistics, G. Cook and B. Seidlhofer (eds.). Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, UK. 

[26] Merrill Swain. 2006. Languaging, agency, and collaboration 
in advanced second language proficiency Reading Reflection. 
In Advanced Language Learning: The Contribution of 
Halliday and Vygotsky, Heidi Byrnes (ed.). Continuum, New 
York, NY, USA, 95–108. 

[27] Merrill Swain. 2013. The inseparability of cognition and 
emotion in second language learning. Language Teaching 46, 
02: 195–207.  

[28] E. R. Thompson. 2007. Development and Validation of an 
Internationally Reliable Short-Form of the Positive and 
Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS). Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology 38, 2: 227–242.  

[29] D. Watson, L. A. Clark, and A. Tellegen. 1988. Development 
and validation of brief measures of positive and negative 
affect: the PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 54, 6: 1063–1070. 

[30] M Wen, D. Yang, and Penstein-Rosé, Carolyn. 2014. 
Sentiment analysis in MOOC discussion forums: What does it 
tell us? 130–137. 

eth 



