
Context Personalization, Preferences, and Performance in 
an Intelligent Tutoring System for Middle School 

Mathematics 
Stephen E. Fancsali 

Steven Ritter 
Carnegie Learning, Inc. 

437 Grant Street, Suite 918 
Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA 
888.851.7094 {x219, x122} 

sfancsali@carnegielearning.com 
sritter@carnegielearning.com 

 

 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
Learners often think math is unrelated to their own interests. 
Instructional software has the potential to provide personalized 
instruction that responds to individuals’ interests. Carnegie 
Learning’s MATHiaTM software for middle school mathematics 
asks learners to specify domains of their interest (e.g., sports & 
fitness, arts & music), as well as names of friends/classmates, and 
uses this information to both choose and personalize word 
problems for individual learners. Our analysis of MATHia’s 
relatively coarse-grained personalization contrasts with more fine-
grained analysis in previous research on word problems in the 
Cognitive Tutor (e.g., finding effects on performance in parts of 
problems that depend on more difficult skills), and we explore 
associations of aggregate preference “honoring” with learner 
performance.  To do so, we define a notion of “strong” learner 
interest area preferences and find that honoring such preferences 
has a small negative association with performance.  However, 
learners that both merely express preferences (either interest area 
preferences or setting names of friends/classmates), and those that 
express strong preferences, tend to perform in ways that are 
associated with better learning compared to learners that do not 
express such preferences. We consider several explanations of 
these findings and suggest important topics for future research. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.1 [Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in Education 
– Computer-assisted instruction (CAI).  

General Terms 
Measurement, Performance, Design, Human Factors. 

Keywords 
Non-cognitive factors, intelligent tutoring systems, preferences, 
personalization, mathematics education. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs) like Carnegie Learning’s 
Cognitive Tutor® (CT) [7] adapt to learners’ evolving knowledge 
by tracking their performance as opportunities to practice 
particular knowledge components (KCs), or skills, are 
encountered. CTs probabilistically assess learner mastery of KCs 
and dynamically present problems based on KCs a learner has yet 
to master.  The educational effectiveness of adapting to cognitive 
factors in this manner is well established [6][9], and many recent 
efforts have focused on enhancing both the educational and 
motivational effects of the software by personalizing instruction 
based on non-cognitive factors [2][4][12].  

In this paper, we focus on context personalization, wherein 
“features of an instructional program are matched to individual 
learner’s personal interests and experiences” [11]. Carnegie 
Learning’s MATHiaTM software is a CT-based ITS for middle 
school mathematics which asks learners to specify domains of 
their interest (e.g., sports & fitness, arts & music) and uses this 
information to pick word problems for individual learners. 
MATHia also provides the ability for learners to specify names of 
friends or classmates, which become the names of characters 
appearing within problems. Both personalization on content and 
names have been shown, in prior experiments, to improve 
learning outcomes (e.g., improved problem solving, motivation, 
and engagement) [1][3][5]. 
 
Walkington [12] found, in an experimental version of CT, that 
content personalization improved learning outcomes, particularly 
on difficult problem steps and on problems with high reading 
level. This work was done on a small number of instructional 
units, which were completed by learners in a few weeks. Our 
focus here is to look at the long-term sustained impact of 
personalization across a whole school year’s worth of curriculum. 
We are particularly concerned with how learners react to the 
extent to which the system “honors” their preferences for 
particular topics and with whether learners expressing strong 
preferences for a topic (or preferences at all) perform differently 
than those who have weak preferences or who did not specify 
interest area or name preferences. 

2. LEARNER PREFERENCES IN MATHIA 
Building on the CT approach to mathematics curricula like 
algebra, MATHia (Figure 1) provides an environment directed at 
younger learners in a series of three middle school mathematics 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org.  
LAK '14, March 24 - 28 2014, Indianapolis, IN, USA 
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2664-3/14/03…$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567574.2567615 
 

73



courses.  In particular, MATHia introduces several non-cognitive, 
context personalization features. 

 
Figure 1. Screenshot of typical, non-personalized algebra 
problem solving in MATHia, with a worksheet/table to 

provide answers to parts of the problem scenario and a graph 
to plot points (© Carnegie Learning, Inc.) 

MATHia contextually personalizes word problems to learner 
preferences in two ways.  First, MATHia allows learners to rate 
four interest area domains (on a scale of one to five “stars”) for 
which mathematics word problems have been tailored: sports & 
fitness, money & business, arts & music, and environment & 
nature1.  Second, MATHia allows learners to set names of their 
favorite classmates or friends that can be integrated into the 
language of problems.  Learner preferences are optionally set via 
a profile, illustrated in Figure 2.  One reason learners may not set 
preferences is that they do not discover this profile (whether via 
exploration in the software, their peers, or instructors). 

 
Figure 2. MATHia preferences profile  

(© Carnegie Learning, Inc.) 
Problem assignment in MATHia proceeds in much the same way 
as in the CT; problems are presented that maximize the learner’s 
exposure to KCs of which the CT has not judged learner mastery.  
However, assuming a learner has provided preference ratings for 
one or more interest areas, MATHia probabilistically chooses 
problems that also may honor those preference settings.  If two 
problems emphasize the same KCs, that set is the maximal set of 
KCs the learner has yet to master in a particular section, and one 
problem has been written to correspond to an interest area that the 
learner has rated higher than the interest area of the other problem 
(or that problem is not preference-tailored), then MATHia is more 

                                                                    
1 A fifth area, humor (i.e., comical problem text), is assumed to be 

an interest area of all learners.  We leave analysis of problems 
tailored to this interest area for future work. 

likely (but not guaranteed) to present the problem tailored to the 
interest area with the higher rating (or any rating at all). 

3. DATA 
To summarize overall preferences, we considered a snapshot of a 
database that stores learner preferences in MATHia.  This 
snapshot contained records for 104,197 learners that logged into 
MATHia at least once from its release in 2011 until the middle of 
2013.  Of these learners, 59.7% (62,168) set interest area 
preferences.  Among those with interest area preferences, 85.2% 
(52,938) provided names of friends or classmates.   

For detailed analysis of associations between preference settings 
and learner performance, we consider data for 2,389 learners, 
from eight2 randomly selected middle schools that have a 
substantial number of MATHia users, with activity in at least one 
MATHia section that includes preference-tailored problems3.  
Specifically, we focus on a set of 1,230 learners that “graduated” 
from (i.e., mastered all KCs associated with) at least five 
preference-tailoring sections.  On average, these learners were 
logged into MATHia for 7.4 hours while working through 
sections that include preference-tailored word problems.  Of these 
learners, 65.4% set interest area preferences (805 learners) and 
71.7% (875 learners) provided names of friends and classmates.  

3.1 Summary of Learner Interest Areas 
From our overall sample of learners that set preferences in 
MATHia, we find that the five star rating is most common, and 
that learners most frequently rate sports & fitness with five stars, 
followed next by arts & music.  Figure 3 provides overall counts 
for each interest area of the ratings they have received. 

 
Figure 3. Frequencies of MATHia interest areas ratings 

Two observations lead us to define a more informative notion of 
learner preferences: 

• 15.7% of learners with preference settings (9,786 
learners) rate all interest areas with five stars. 

• 25.7% of learners with preference settings (16,003 
learners) rate all interest areas with the same rating. 

Learners that rate all interest areas with the same number of stars 
may have little interest in any interest areas; diverse interests in all 
areas; or, perhaps these learners are not meaningfully providing 
information about their interests.  Since we are not in a position to 
disentangle these possibilities, we provide a definition of “strong” 
preferences and posit that, for learners whose preferences meet 

                                                                    
2 Processing fine-grained log data for detailed analyses is time-

consuming, and we have yet to process data for all MATHia 
users.  Nevertheless, we have no reason to believe that this 
subset is not representative of our broader user population. 

3 Roughly 20% of the 300 sections across all three MATHia 
course curricula include preference-tailored word problems. 

74



this definition, we have informative data to analyze relationships 
between “honoring” preferences and learning. 

3.2 “Strong” Preferences 
For MATHia interest areas, we define learners to have “strong” 
preferences if they set at least one interest area with a five star 
rating and at least one interest area with a one star rating or no 
rating.  We posit that such learners provide more informative 
preferences and that these are individuals for whom the notion of 
honoring preferences is clear. 

By this definition, 61.2% (38,060) of learners in our large sample 
with set interest areas have strong preferences.  In our smaller 
sample for detailed analysis, 64.3% of learners (805) with set 
interest areas have strong preferences. 

3.3 Learning Outcomes 
Recent analysis of CT usage data for a sample of 3,224 middle 
school learners in a Virginia school district [8] provides a set of 
CT usage or “process” variables that are positively associated 
with scores on the Virginia Department of Education’s Standards 
of Learning (SOL) mathematics exam [10].  Since we lack 
external measures like standardized test scores or final exam 
scores for our sample of MATHia learners, we use these variables 
as learning outcomes. 

We construct the following variables over MATHia sections that 
include preference-tailored word problems from log data for our 
sample of 1,230 learners that graduated from at least five such 
sections: 

• assistance_per_problem: average over sections of the 
per-section average sum of hints and errors per problem  
(log-transformed and normalized per section); this is an 
indicator of struggle during problem solving. 

• sections_encountered: log-transformed number of 
sections that a learner attempts that contain preference-
tailored problems in MATHia4 

• sections_mastered_per_hour: log-transformed average 
number of sections from which a learner graduates per 
hour; this is an indicator of efficiency in working 
through material. 

• total_login_time: total amount of time the learner was 
logged into MATHia in sections that include 
preference-tailored problems 

Given the effectiveness of CT [6] and past results [8], students 
encountering more material and proceeding efficiently through it 
provide reasonable outcomes, absent external measures. We now 
explore associations between the extent to which we  “honor” 
preferences and these learning outcomes.  Then we consider how 
learners’ mere expression of preferences is associated with these 
outcomes. 

4. ANALYSIS 
4.1  “Honoring” Preferences & Performance 
Since MATHia probabilistically presents problems that match 
learner interest areas when a set of problems all contain 
appropriate KCs that a learner has yet to master, we can expect, 
by chance, different learners to experience different rates of 
                                                                    
4 We diverge from [8] and do not include a variable representing 

the number of skills encountered in sections of MATHia 
because this variable is almost perfectly correlated (r = .99) with 
sections_encountered.  

experiencing problems that correspond to their preferences. We 
call cases where MATHia presented a problem corresponding to 
the learner’s preference “honoring” that preference. For learners 
that set strong preferences, we calculate the proportion of 
problems they were presented that match their five star interest 
areas, in sections that include preference-tailored problems. We 
find that there is a relatively restricted range for this proportion, 
illustrated in the histogram for 518 learners in Figure 4.  Even in 
sections that include problems tailored to interest areas, most 
learners are presented problems that match their interest area(s) 
only 10% to 30% of the time.  While the proportion of preference-
honoring problems assigned is randomly determined per learner, 
making this a natural experiment, the restricted range in this 
distribution must be kept in mind in interpreting results. 

 
Figure 4. Histogram of strong preference learners (n = 518) 

counts & the proportion of preference (i.e., interest area) 
honoring problems presented 

Despite this restricted range, we consider correlations of honoring 
interest areas for strong preference learners with the four learning 
outcomes we have chosen.  To illustrate, Figure 5 is a scatterplot 
of assistance_per_problem and the proportion of preference 
honoring problems. 

 
Figure 5. Scatterplot of assistance_per_problem & proportion 

of preference honoring problems for strong preference 
learners (n = 518) 

Visual inspection of this scatterplot does not lead to an impression 
of a strong correlation or association between assistance (i.e., the 
extent to which a learner struggles) and honoring preferences.  
Table 1 provides quantitative pairwise correlations between 
preference honoring and our four learning outcomes and shows 
Pearson’s r = .14 in the scatterplot of Figure 5.  While three of the 
four variables have statistically significant correlations with 
preference honoring, none of the correlations are especially large. 

Further, controlling for learner efficiency via 
sections_mastered_per_hour, we find that the partial correlation 

75



of assistance_per_problem and preference honoring is 
insignificant (r = .043, p = .33) as is the correlation between 
preference honoring and total_login_time (r = .063, p = .154).  
This is partially due to expected dynamics of learner interaction 
with the tutor and the relatively high correlation of 
sections_mastered_per_hour with assistance_per_problem (r =  
-.76, p < .001) and with total_login_time (r = -.69, p < .001) in 
this sub-sample5.     

Table 1. Pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients for each 
MATHia process variables and the proportion of preference 

honoring problems presented to learners 
MATHia	  process	  variable	   Pearson’s	  r	   p	  value	  

assistance_per_problem	   .14	   .002	  

sections_encountered	   .09	   .052	  

sections_mastered_per_hour	   -­?.14	   .001	  

total_login_time	   .14	   .001	  

These analyses are not intended to exhaust the investigation of the 
dynamics among our chosen learning outcomes, but merely to 
suggest that the aggregate effect (if any) of preference honoring 
on such coarse-grained learning outcomes is not large.  We 
provide one possible explanation of a weak negative association 
between preference honoring and learning in the discussion.  
However, given a lack of a strong association, we focus on the 
broader issue of whether merely expressing preferences is 
associated with better learning outcomes.   

4.2 Strong vs. Weak Interest Area 
Preferences & Performance 
First, we compare differences in learning outcomes for learners 
that set strong interest area preferences (n = 518) compared to 
those that set weak preferences (n = 287).   

Table 2. Table of Welch two sample, two-sided t-test results 
comparing the mean of MATHia process variables for 
learners with strong vs. weak interest area preferences  
MATHia	  process	  variable	   strong	  

mean	  
(sd)	  

weak	  
mean	  
(sd)	  

p	   d	  

assistance_per_problem6	   -­?.15	  
(.56)	  

-­?.07	  
(.60)	  

.05	   -­?.14	  

sections_encountered	   2.67	  
(.46)	  

2.62	  
(.44)	  

.11	   .11	  

sections_mastered_per_hour	   .76	  
(.62)	  

.63	  
(.65)	  

.01	   .2	  

total_login_time7	   7.1	  
(4.2)	  

7.6	  
(4.9)	  

.16	   -­?.1	  

Results for two-sided Welch two sample t-tests for difference in 
means as well as values of Cohen’s d are provided in Table 2.  We 
provide calculations of d only for perspective of how 

                                                                    
5 Both correlations are somewhat smaller in the larger sample of 

1,230 learners that graduated from at least five preference-
honoring sections: for assistance_per_problem, r = -.69 (p < 
.001) and for total_login_time, r = -.59 (p < .001). 

6 Recall that assistance_per_problem is normalized (i.e., a z-
score) across all learners that graduated from at least 5 sections 
with preference-tailored problems. 

7 We provide mean total_login_time in hours. 

“substantive” significant differences are, as we are working with 
observational data and with non-trivial sample sizes. 

We find one statistically significant difference at the ? = .05 level: 
learners with strong preferences tend to work through MATHia 
sections that include preference-tailored problems more efficiently 
(i.e., have greater sections_mastered_per_hour).  As greater 
efficiency is positively associated with an external standardized 
test in a previous study, we might predict that learners with strong 
preferences may achieve better outcomes as well. 
Strong preference learners tend to require assistance less than 
those with weak preferences, but the difference is not statistically 
significant.  Further, weak preference learners tend to encounter 
fewer sections with greater time logged into MATHia sections, 
but neither difference is statistically significant. 

4.3 Interest Area Preference Settings & 
Performance 
We now consider differences in MATHia process variables 
between learners that set interest area preferences (both strong and 
weak, n = 805) versus those learners that did not set interest area 
preferences (n = 425).   

Table 3 provides a summary of these results.  We find that the 
only significant difference is that learners that set preferences seek 
(or require) less assistance. While on average they encounter 
roughly the same number of sections, working through material 
with slightly greater efficiency while logged in for less time, none 
of the differences are statistically significant.  Since 
assistance_per_problem is negatively associated with external 
learning outcomes [8], we would predict that those who merely 
set their interest area preferences also achieve better outcomes. 

Table 3. Table of t-test results comparing the mean of 
MATHia process variables across learners that set interest 

area preferences vs. those that did not set preferences  
MATHia	  process	  variable	   set	  

mean	  
(sd)	  

not	  set	  
mean	  
(sd)	  

p	   d	  

assistance_per_problem	   -­?.12	  
(.58)	  

-­?.05	  
(.60)	  

.03	   -­?.12	  

sections_encountered	   2.65	  
(.45)	  

2.67	  
(.45)	  

.38	   -­?.04	  

sections_mastered_per_hour	   .71	  
(.63)	  

.66	  
(.66)	  

.19	   .08	  

total_login_time	   7.3	  
(4.5)	  

7.6	  
(4.6)	  

.24	   -­?.07	  

4.4 Setting Names & Performance 
We now consider whether learners’ providing names of 
classmates is associated with better learning.  Table 4 presents the 
same statistics we have considered but for learners that set names 
of classmates or friends (n = 875; of these learners, 721 set 
interest area preferences) versus those learners that do not do so (n 
= 355; 84 of whom set interest area preferences).   

We find that the direction of differences align with trends we 
observe for learners with strong preferences and those that set 
interest areas, but we find that these differences are all significant 
when compared to learners that did not set names.  Learners that 
set these names encounter more material while completing 
sections more efficiently (and with less assistance) in less time.  
That is, overall, they perform better in MATHia on metrics that 
have been found to be associated with external learning outcomes.    

76



Table 4. Comparison of learners that set names of classmates 
or friends vs. learners that do not do so 

MATHia	  process	  variable	   set	  
mean	  
(sd)	  

not	  set	  
mean	  
(sd)	  

p	   d	  

assistance_per_problem	   -­?.14	  
(.57)	  

.02	  
(.61)	  

<.001	   -­?.27	  

sections_encountered	   2.68	  
(.45)	  

2.61	  
(.44)	  

.009	   .16	  

sections_mastered_per_hour	   .75	  
(1.7)	  

.56	  
(1.5)	  

<.001	   .12	  

total_login_time	   7.1	  
(4.2)	  

8.2	  
(5.2)	  

<.001	   -­?.23	  

5. DISCUSSION & FUTURE WORK 
Our results raise important questions about effects of 
personalization, metrics, and ITS design. These results suggest 
only weak, possibly negative effects for honoring domain 
preferences over a school year. On the other hand, we find some 
advantages for learners who set such preferences and, among 
those, of learners who have strong preferences. With respect to 
specifying names of characters, we find relatively robust effects. 

In interpreting these results, it is important to consider the 
learner’s perspective within MATHia. Only a subset of MATHia 
problems are word problems that are amenable to the type of 
personalization we explore here. In fact, only 20% of sections 
contain word problems that could respond to these preferences. 
Since preference honoring was probabilistic, the learner’s 
experience would be that a small percentage of problems honor 
preferences (even smaller than proportions shown in Figure 4). 
Combined with the restricted range of preference honoring, this is 
a fairly weak manipulation. In fact, learners may be frustrated that 
specifying their preferences has such a small effect on 
performance, perhaps leading to the small negative correlation 
between the extent to which MATHia honors preferences and 
sections_mastered_per_hour. While honoring preferences more 
frequently might counter this, it also might be possible to make 
preference honoring more visible in the MATHia interface. For 
example, future software might notify learners about conditions 
that have led to the presentation of a problem (e.g., “Because you 
like sports, we chose the following…”). 

The findings on setting domain preferences and names of friends 
may indicate that some learners are more appreciative of the 
opportunity to set preferences, leading to better positive affect 
towards MATHia and better outcomes. Alternatively, setting such 
preferences may be driven by a factor such as conscientiousness. 
Learners who are predisposed to care about their work in math 
class may be more likely to set such preferences and more likely 
to achieve better outcomes. Differences in the tendency to set 
names vs. domain preferences may allow us to better explore this 
possibility.  Future work might also include a measure of prior 
math ability (lacking in our large but retrospective sample) and/or 
confidence or self-efficacy to better understand this association. 

Prior research [1][3][5][11][12] has shown that, at the problem 
level, we see advantages from personalizing problems. These 
experiments typically personalize all problems presented over a 
short period of time. To extend these results to everyday 
classrooms, we need to understand whether this relatively 
intensive personalization will scale to the context where learners 
get personalized problems spread out over a full school year. Our 
initial results may suggest that personalization at the problem 

level needs to be more apparent to learners (either by making it 
more frequent or by pointing out the personalization) but also that 
the use of personalization features appears to be associated with 
improved outcomes. Future work will build on these possibilities. 

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Susan Berman, Bob Hausmann, Chas Murray, Tristan 
Nixon, and Michael Yudelson for comments on this work. 

7. REFERENCES 
[1] Anand, P.G., and Ross, S.M. 1987. Using computer-assisted 

instruction to personalize arithmetic materials for elementary 
school children. J Educ Psychol 79, 1, 72–78. 

[2] Bernacki, M.L., Nokes-Malach, T.J., and Aleven, V. 2013. 
Fine-Grained Assessment of Motivation Over Long Periods 
of Learning with an Intelligent Tutoring System: 
Methodology, Advantages, and Preliminary Results. In 
International Handbook of Metacognition and Learning 
Technologies. Springer, Berlin, 629-644. 

[3] Cordova, D. I., and Lepper, M. R. 1996. Intrinsic Motivation 
and the Process of Learning: Beneficial Effects of 
Contextualization, Personalization, and Choice. J Educ 
Psychol 88, 4, 715-730. 

[4] Fancsali, S.E., Ritter, S., Stamper, J., and Nixon, N. 2013. 
Toward “Hyper-Personalized” Cognitive Tutors. In AIED 
2013 Workshop Proc. Vol. 7: GIFT (Memphis, TN, July 13, 
2013), 71-79. 

[5] Ku, H., and Sullivan, H. J. 2002. Student performance and 
attitudes using personalized mathematics instruction. 
Educational Technology Research and Development 50, 1, 
21-34. 

[6] Pane, J.F., Griffin, B.A., McCaffrey, D.F., and Karam, R. 
2013. Effectiveness of Cognitive Tutor Algebra I at Scale. 
RAND Education Working Paper: WR-984-DEIES. 

[7] Ritter, S., Anderson, J.R., Koedinger, K.R., and Corbett, A.T. 
2007. Cognitive Tutor: Applied Research in Mathematics 
Education. Psychon B Rev 14, 249-255. 

[8] Ritter, S., Joshi, A., Fancsali, S.E., and Nixon, T. 2013. 
Predicting Standardized Test Scores from Cognitive Tutor 
Interactions. In Proc. of the 6th International Conf. on 
Educational Data Mining (Memphis, TN, July 6-9, 2013). 
169-176. 

[9] Ritter, S., Kulikowich, J., Lei, P., McGuire, C.L., and 
Morgan, P. 2007. What evidence matters? A randomized 
field trial of Cognitive Tutor Algebra I. In Supporting 
Learning Flow through Integrative Technologies: Volume 
162 Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications. IOS 
Press, Amsterdam, 13-20. 

[10] Virginia Department of Education. 2013. Standards of 
Learning (SOL) & Testing. Retrieved October 9, 2013.  
http://www.doe.virginia.gov/testing/ 

[11] Walkington, C.A. and Maull, K. 2011. Exploring the 
Assistance Dilemma: The Case of Context Personalization. 
In Proc. of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science 
Society (Boston, MA, July 20-23, 2011). 90-95. 

[12] Walkington, C.A. and Sherman, M. 2012. Using Adaptive 
Learning Technologies to Personalize Instruction: The 
Impact of Interest-Based Scenarios on Performance in 
Algebra. In Proc. of the 10th International Conf. of the 
Learning Sciences (Sydney, July 2-6, 2012). 80-87.

77





