
When Learning is High Stake 
Cecilie Johanne               
Slokvik Hansen     

Technology for Practice (T4P), Uni 
Research Health, Bergen, Norway 

cecilie.hansen@uni.no     
Grete Netteland    

Dep. Of social science, Sogn and 
Fjordane university college, Norway 

grete.netteland@hisf.no 

Barbara Wasson    
T4P, Uni Research Health, Centre for 

the Science of Learning and 
Technology (SLATE), InfoMedia, 

University of Bergen, Norway  
barbara.wasson@uib.no          

Hans Skretting   
InfoMedia, University of Bergen, 

Norway   
hans.skretting@gmail.com        

Marina Hirnstein  
Technology for Practice (T4P), Uni 
Research Health, Bergen, Norway 

marina.hirnstein@uni.no  

 

ABSTRACT 
Firefighter learning is high stake. They need to maintain certain 
competence levels related to physical, mental, and firefighting 
and rescue skills in order to provide the public with a high level 
of emergency service. Fire and Rescue Services need to 
maintain an overview of the current competences of their 
personnel and to react when there is a competence gap. This 
poster presents our approach to using competence modelling, 
learner models, learning analytics, and visualisations in order 
provide insight into competence status and development on the 
individual, team, and organisation level, and to provide early-
alerts and automated messages to instructors responsible for 
planning training activities, as well as to team leaders 
responsible for making decisions about teams in high stakes 
situations. 

CCS Concepts 
•General and reference? •Empirical studies •Information 
systems? •Decision support systems •Human centered 
computing? •User models •Visual analytics •Applied 
computing? •Education •Social and professional topics? 
•Model curricula •Student assessment •Adult education 
•Testing, certification and licensing 

Keywords 
Learning Analytics; Competence development; Open Learner 
model; Visualization 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Can learner models and visualisation of competences, for 
individuals, groups, and the organisation as a whole, help to 
improve decision making about training needs? As part of an 
increasing trend towards an evidence-based policy, the EU 
policy objectives promote standardisation of competences 
through the European Framework for Key Competences for 
Lifelong Learning [1]. This is a reference tool for EU countries 
and their education and training policies. Norway is no 
exception with a focus on competence development within 
several sectors, including education, health and safety (NOU, 

2012; NDCP, 2013). With a need for a continuous focus on 
education and training, many institutions and organisations 
experience challenges in collecting and analysing information 
about learners, and groups of learners. 

Maintaining an overview of competence status in the 
organisation is needed in order to make informed decisions 
about learning, teaching, and organizational development. The 
Fire and Rescue Service (FRS) is an example of where the need 
of such overview is crucial, both at an individual employee 
level, a team level, and organizational level. In Norway, 
firefighters are recruited from vocational schools educating e.g. 
carpenter or mason. FRSs are themselves responsible for the 
education and training of these potential firefighters, and are 
further required to ensure that the firefighters maintain extreme 
skills and meet intensive fitness standards. This is not only 
related to the two years of training to become a firefighter, but 
continuously throughout their entire career. 

2. PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT AND               
COMEPTENCE TRACKING 
The iComPAss project [2] seeks to develop tools and methods 
that can increase the ability to assess and identify competence 
gaps in order for instructors to make decisions about instruction 
and competence development before they become problematic. 
We support this by drawing on learner models [3], competence 
modelling, assessment, performance evaluation, and learning 
analytics. Our approach builds on the research from two 
previous EU-projects (ADAPT-IT and Next-Tell), and on the 
partnership between Sotra Fire and Rescue Service (SFRS) and 
a software company, Enovate AS, both situated on the west 
coast of Norway. SFRS uses a competence tracking and training 
activity planning tool called ADAPT-IT  (Figure 1) developed 
by Enovate AS. 

 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact 
the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada  
ACM 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029461 



ADAPT-IT addressed the challenges associated with keeping 
track of planning of training to meet the competence needs of 
the fire and rescue service. The tool was designed to assist the 
end users to collect and document key information using a 
mixture of web-tools and mobile apps. By using the tool the 
management has access to a web interface that is constantly 
updated with an overview of the competence status of their fire 
department. ADAPT-IT was tailored to improve the planning 
of training and documentation for fire departments by 
incorporating streamlined competence control, planning, crew 
and equipment, deviation in- app reporting using voice and 
media, combining assessment tools that inform on relevant 
required competence needs.  

In iComPAss we addresses how to harvest data from 
assessment situations on readiness for- and performance in real 
life incidents incident action, and training situations in order to 
develop learner models and form the basis of visualisations of 
the current situation that support inquiry [4, 5] for decision 
making in high stake situations.  

ADAPT-IT helps the instructor to keep track of the needs in 
the entire organisation according to the requirements of the 
different roles. In an interview an instructor at SFRS described 
how the tool is used in planning of training activities. ADAPT-
IT maintains a competence profile, which is updated with 
assessment data from training situations, certifications formal 
knowledge quizzes, etc. We are implementing a Competency 
Gap Analysis (learning analytics) on the learner models that 
supports the instructor in planning training activities and the 
renewal of certifications by providing early-alerts and 
automated messages when particular situations are discovered. 
This enables the instructor to be proactive and invest in 
training, courses, and certification of the personnel as needed. 
This is done by:  

1. collecting assessment data from exercises and real 
fire and rescue situations, on identified competences. 

2. using defined criteria for collected information in 
order to visualise the competence profile through 
histograms and spider graphs. 

Furthermore, the planned analytics functionality of ADAPT-IT 
will also provide visualisations that enable a team leader to 
make real-time decisions about team constellations when 
responding to an incident  (Figure 2). 

3. CURRENT AND FUTURE WORK 
It is crucial for firefighters to have the needed competences to 
perform the risk intensive tasks required of them in a variety of 
fire and rescue situations. As a member of an incident team the   
firefighters have to trust all members to have the needed 
competences. Therefore, it is crucial for the instructor to have 
an overview of the training needs in the department. For 
example, interviews with firefighters and leaders identified a 
need to be able to report on readiness for smoke diving. In 
order to collect readiness data where firefighters reporting for 
duty answer questions related to mental and physical readiness 
and a question about their availability to smoke dive, a 
readiness app is under development. In the app the team leader 
will be presented with a dashboard that supports the 
assignment of firefighters to the required tasks in a response 
situation. The data collected by this readiness app needs to be 
supplemented with data from the learner model, data such as 
certification status, performance on particular tasks, 

competence levels, etc.  

Use of technology for learning in the workplace has increased 
the amount and variety of electronic data available for use in 
learning analytics and visualisation. Therefore it is also 
important to study how people use this information. We will 
build on our earlier work on a framework for data literacy and 
use for teaching [6] and learning [7] as a step in exploring how 
the collected and visualised information is interpreted and 
transformed into new practices 

 
 

 

 

4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The iComPAss project is supported by the Research Council of 
Norway grant number 246765/H20. We thank the Sotra Fire and 
Rescue service and Enovate AS. 

5. REFERENCES 
[1] European Communities (2008). The European Qualifications 
Framework for Lifelong Learning. Luxembourg: Office for 
Official Publications of the European Communities. 

[2] Hansen, C.; Netteland, G; Wasson, B. (2016). Learning 
analytics and open learning modelling for professional 
competence development of firefighters and future healthcare 
leaders. In: CEUR Workshop. Proceedings,1601, 87-90. 

[3] Bull, S. & Kay, J. (2007). Student Models that Invite the 
Learner In: The SMILI Open Learner Modelling Framework, 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 
17(2), 89-120. 

[4] Hansen, C.; Wasson, B. (2016). Teacher inquiry into student 
learning: The TISL heart model and method for use in teachers' 
professional development. Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy, 
10, 24-49. 

[5]  Luckin, R.; Hansen, C.; Wasson, B.; Clark, W.; Avramides, 
K.; Hunter, J.; Oliver, M. (2016). Teacher Inquiry into Students' 
Learning: Researching Pedagogical Innovations. In: Measuring 
and Visualizing Learning in the Information-Rich Classroom, 
74-91. London: Routledge. 

[6] Wasson, B.; Hansen, C. (2016). Data Literacy and Use for 
Teaching. In: Measuring and Visualizing Learning in the 
Information-Rich Classroom, 56-73. London: Routledge. 

[7] Wasson, B.; Hansen, C.; Netteland, G. (2016) Data literacy 
and use for learning when using learning analytics for learners. 
In: CEUR Workshop Proceedings; Vol. 1596. s. 38-41.





