
Wikiglass: A Learning Analytic Tool for Visualizing 
Collaborative Wikis of Secondary School Students 

Xiao Hu1    Jason Ip2    Koossulraj Sadaful3    George Lui3    Sam Chu1 
1. Faculty of Education  2Faculty of Business and Economics 3Department of Computer Science 

The University of Hong Kong 

Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong 

{xiaoxhu, jasonipcy, ksadaful, luifei23, samchu}@hku.hk 

  

ABSTRACT 
This demo presents Wikiglass, a learning analytic tool for 
visualizing the statistics and timelines of collaborative Wikis built 
by secondary school students during their group project in 
inquiry-based learning. The tool adopts a modular structure for 
the flexibility of reuse with different data sources. The client side 
is built with the Model-View-Controller framework and the 
AngularJS library whereas the server side manages the database 
and data sources. The tool is currently used by secondary teachers 
in Hong Kong and is undergoing evaluation and improvement.     
CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing?Visual analytics   • Human-
centered computing~Wikis   • Applied computing ? 
Collaborative learning 

Keywords 
Wiki; visualization; statistics; timeline; collaborative writing 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Wiki is widely regarded as a useful tool to facilitate project-based 
learning [1], but the amount of learning evidence made available 
by the tool may discourage teachers from adopting it because of 
the perceived increase of workload in continuous student 
assessment [2]. To tackle this problem, tools have been built to 
assist teachers in processing and making sense of the large amount 
of continuous student input [3]. However, few existing tools work 
with student writings in Chinese and are designed for secondary 
school teachers who often have heavy workload and may not be 
expert computer users. In this study, we build a learning analytic 
tool, Wikiglass, to help secondary school teachers in Hong Kong 
and surrounding regions to monitor student collaboration and 
progress in group projects using Wikis.  
For this initial round of development, teachers use PBworks as the 
platform for their students to collaborate on inquiry-based projects 
over a five-month period. The students are required to work in 
groups each consisting of about five students. Each group write 
their project report on their Wiki, with different sections of the 
report (e.g., Introduction, Methodology, etc.) written on separate 
pages. It is expected that the clear, accurate and timely 

information provided by Wikiglass can help teachers keep track of 
student progress, based on which they can provide proper 
interventions to needed individual and/or groups of students 
during the learning process instead of after.    

2. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
Figure 1 shows the general structure of Wikiglass which can be 
divided into two layers, client and server, and four main 
components: visualization, logic, Wikiglass Application Program 
Interface (API) and the database.  

 
Figure 1: System architecture of Wikiglass. 

2.1 The Client Side 
The client side is implemented with the AngularJS library [4] and 
the Model-View-Controller (MVC) framework, which allows for 
flexibility in reuse and ease of development. This architecture also 
enables distributing computation load between the server and the 
client so that the server can be more efficient and robust. 
The client side framework consists of two layers, the Controller 
and the View (with the Model in the MVC framework being the 
data from the server). The View is the visualizations the users will 
see, such as graphs, tables and charts. It does not concern itself 
with the requests for or the actual processing of the data. The 
latter functions are accomplished within the Controller. The 
Controller is responsible to direct user’s requests, request data 
from the API, process the data and render it using the View. 

2.2 The Server Side 
The server side is responsible for data collection and 
preprocessing. Raw data from source Wikis (e.g., PBworks) are 
obtained through the APIs provided by the source, including but 
not limited to student user information, page content, and revision 
records. Data preprocessing involves stripping unneeded tags and 
extracting useful elements. A database is set up to store the 
processed raw data as well as derived statistics (e.g., number of 
revisions made by each student) for different purposes of analysis 
and visualizations. 

 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other 
uses, contact the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883966 

 
 



To maximize the flexibility of Wikiglass, we designed a generic 
and easily readable API for Wikiglass. It makes the data in the 
Wikiglass database accessible quickly by different client 
applications. The endpoints transfer data are in the JavaScript 
Object Notation (JSON) format which nowadays is a universal 
format for data exchange on the Internet. The API makes it 
convenient to develop alternative client sides.  

3. FEATURES 
3.1 Visualization 
Currently Wikiglass provides two visualization modes. The 
statistics mode allows teachers to compare statistics of groups in 
one class or individual students in one group (Figure 2). The 
statistics include revision counts, total words in the latest versions 
of Wiki pages, page counts, and number of words added and 
deleted by each student. For each student, Wikiglass also shows 
the number of words added and deleted across different pages. 

 
Figure 2: Statistics mode of visualization. 

The timeline mode displays statistics accumulated by dates on a 
weekly basis (Figure 3).  It also includes total revision counts for 
each group and each student in a group as well as number of word 
amendment made by each group. The timeline visualizations 
allow teachers to monitor the progress of the groups or individual 
students in a clear and easy manner. 

 
Figure 3: Timeline mode of visualization. 

Nearly all visualizations are clickable, facilitating teachers’ 
navigation in the system. For example, clicking one bar 
(corresponding to one group) in the class page shown in Figure 2 
will lead the user to the page of that group where contributions of 
group members are displayed. Clicking one pie (corresponding to 
one student) in the pie chart shown in Figure 2 will lead the user 
to the page of that student where his/her contributions to different 

pages are visualized. Similarly, the lines in the timeline 
visualization are all clickable and clicking each line leads to the 
corresponding page of the corresponding group or student.    

3.2 Daily update of database 
As the student projects last five months, teachers need to monitor 
student progress on a continuous basis. Therefore, Wikiglass 
needs to update its database regularly. To fulfil this purpose, a 
task scheduler in the server side is set up to retrieve all the 
updated versions of the Wikis in the source side and update the 
databases accordingly. The task scheduler is currently set to 
update on a daily basis as it is the estimated usage frequency of 
the teachers. Once the new data are extracted and processed, the 
visualizations will be automatically updated on the client side. 
The task scheduler is designed to be reconfigurable to different 
time slots and/or different frequency.   

3.3 Event Logging 
For usage statistics, users’ interactive activities with Wikiglass are 
logged, such as duration of use, number of views of each page, 
and the type of visualization mode (statistics/timeline) being used. 
This information will be useful for subsequent analytics aiming to 
improve user experience and system functionality. 

3.4 Weekly Summary 
At the end of every week, teachers will receive emails 
summarizing the progress of the groups and students they teach. 
In this way, teachers can have a quick review on the performance 
of different groups and students, and be reminded to logon 
Wikiglass for more detailed information. 

4. FUTURE WORK 
The next steps include identifying and visualizing quality 
indicators of student collaborative writing and evaluating the 
impacts of the tool on teaching and learning.  

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work was partially supported by an Early Career Scheme 
grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region, China. (Project No. HKU 27401114) and 
a Teaching Development Fund by the Faculty of Education, 
University of Hong Kong. 

REFERENCES 
[1] Chu, S.K.W., Siu, F.L.C., Liang, M., Capio, C.M. & Wu, 

W.W.Y. 2013. Users’ experiences and perceptions on using 
two wiki platforms for collaborative learning and knowledge 
management. Online Information Review, 37(2), 304–325. 
DOI= http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/OIR-03-2011-0043 

[2] Kear, K., Donelan, H., & Williams, J. 2014. Using wikis for 
online group projects: Student and tutor perspectives. 
International Review of Research in Open and Distance 
Learning, 15(4), 70-90. 

[3] Kubincová, Z., Homola, M., & Janajev, R. 2012. Tool-
supported assessment of wiki-based assignments. Paper 
presented at the 4th International Conference on Computer 
Supported Education (CSEDU 2012), Porto, Portugal. 

[4] Darwin, P. B., & Kozlowski, P. 2013. AngularJS web 
application development. Packt Publishing Ltd.



