
Applying Analytics for a Learning Portal: 
the Organic.Edunet Case Study

Nikos Palavitsinis, Vassilios Protonotarios, Nikos Manouselis 
Greek Research and Technology Network (GRNET),

56 Messogeion Av., 115 27, Athens, Greece 
palavitsinis@grnet.gr; vprot@aua.gr; nikosm@ieee.org 

ABSTRACT
Learning portals are education-oriented Web portals, which 
provide access to a variety of educational material, usually 
coming from various sources.  In order to explore how they can 
support their users during an educational activity (e.g. preparation 
of teaching a course), it would be interesting to study the behavior 
of their visitors, focusing on the particular context in which 
specific actions are taking place. For example, user activities may 
be analyzed during specific learning events, when activities are 
more focused. This paper discusses the case study of the 
Organic.Edunet Web portal (www.organic-edunet.eu), a learning 
portal for organic agriculture educators that provides access to 
more than 10,500 learning resources from a federation of 11 
institutional repositories. The portal mostly focuses on serving 
school teachers and university tutors and has attracted until today 
almost 42.200 unique visitors from more than 160 countries, out 
of which about 2.600 have registered to the portal. An effort is 
made to study the users’ behavior, focusing in tutors and 
educators in both schools and universities, in relation to specific 
training events in which we know that they have been involved. 
Therefore, we analyze logs of user activities that took place on 
specific dates and geographical locations, in order to potentially 
identify notable changes in their normal visiting behavior. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.1 [Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in Education

General Terms
Design, Theory. 

Keywords
Web portal, log analysis, learning repositories, agriculture   

1. INTRODUCTION
Initially the term web portal was used to refer to well-known 
Internet search and navigation sites that provided a starting point 
for users to explore and access information on the World Wide 

Web [17]. The term “Internet portal” or “Web portal” began to be 
used to describe mega-sites (such as Yahoo!, Excite, AOL, MSN, 
Netscape Netcenter, and others) that many Web visitors used as a 
‘starting point’ for their web surfing. Since that time, Web portal 
have significantly expanded and matured, and a diverse range of 
portal types have been developed and used in different contexts 
[10]. Nowadays, Web portals are generally defined as gateways to 
information and services from multiple sources [14]. One 
important component is the organization, navigation, labeling and 
indexing of their content in order to facilitate searching of 
information and services, so that users can search, identify and 
access the most appropriate resources for their needs.  

 Learning portals, Web portals that offer learners or educators 
with a large selection of learning resources, are essential to the 
further integration of information technologies and learning [7]. 
The purpose of a learning portal is not simply indexing and 
delivery but to facilitate actual reuse and sharing [5]. Thus, the 
expected usage of services and resources found in learning portals 
could be considered as different compared to the usage of other 
types of portals (such as entertainment, information or 
commercial ones). In order to explore more about the way that 
users of learning portals interact with the portal services and the 
indexed content, it is often useful to engage analytics - usually by 
studying the log files of the portal. Such a log analysis can take 
place in a systematic, repeatable but also practical way, allowing 
portal owners to explore the actual usage of their learning portal 
and to identify potentially interesting patterns of use [9][11]. 

 In this paper, we examine the case of a Web portal that supports 
users in finding digital learning resources to support and enrich 
their teaching activities. It is the case of the Organic.Edunet portal 
(www.organic-edunet.eu) that aggregates resources on organic 
agriculture and agro-ecology, allowing educators to find and 
retrieve this content from a single point of access. We particularly 
examine how the portal has been used before, during and after the 
organization of training events for potential users (i.e. educators) 
in several European countries. This analysis focuses both on the 
general usage statistics of the portal, but it also looks at the user 
level, trying to identify changes on the typical user profile of the 
portal due to the training events that were organized. 
Additionally, a comparison is attempted, looking at the same 
statistics over an extended period of 7 months, when the portal 
was supported by community events organized such as the Open 
Days and the statistics for the next 7 months, when the project 
was completed and the portal was functioning independent of 
project related events. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
LAK’11, February 27-March 1, 2011, Banff, AB, Canada. 
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-1057-4/11/02…$10.00. 

140



2. BACKGROUND
The Organic.Edunet Web portal aims to facilitate access, usage 
and exploitation of digital educational content related to Organic 
Agriculture (OA) and Agroecology (AE). Organic.Edunet aims to 
support stakeholders producing content about OA & AE in order 
to publish it in an online federation of learning repositories and 
describe it according to multilingual, standard-complying 
metadata. The portal front-end features a multilingual user 
interface translated into fourteen (14) languages, providing access 
to almost 11.000 learning resources from a federation of eleven 
(11) institutional repositories. The targeted audiences of 
Organic.Edunet portal are mainly educators: school teachers 
looking for resources to help them prepare their relevant teaching 
activities (e.g. how to set up a school garden to support hands-on 
environmental education); and academics (professors, teaching 
staff or researchers) in agriculture and life science topics, looking 
for resources to help them with their teaching, learning and 
research activities (e.g. writing a case study report on a particular 
crop or farm type). Potential users also include the stakeholders 
producing content, such as agricultural libraries and academic 
publishers. The portal has attracted, until the end of June 2011, 
54.300 visits and 209.700 page views from 42.200 unique visitors 
from approximately 170 countries, out of which more than 2.600 

have registered to the portal. These numbers assure that the portal 
has been used from a wide audience, thus allowing an analysis of 
the users’ behavior to reach safe conclusions as far as the portal 
usage is concerned.

In order to introduce the potential users to the portal, a series of 
Open Days have been organized in various countries, featuring 
validation events where educators had the chance to work with the 
Organic.Edunet portal. These events were organized based on 
specific guidelines and also provided clear instructions to all the 
participants (http://virtuelleschule.bmukk.gv.at/projekte-
international/eu-projekte/organicedunet/open-days/). From its 
launch, the Organic.Edunet Portal has been linked to a Google 
Analytics (http://www.google.com/analytics) account in order to 
track the visits and be able to document its usage. Another 
envisaged use for this account was to try and evaluate the portal 
through analyzing focused statistics having to do with a range of 
parameters, like the day or time of visit, the geographic areas of 
the visitors, but also the origins of their visits. The visitors’ log 
files have been collected and analyzed using the Google Analytics 
tool in order for observations to be made in relation to the way the 
behavior of users was affected by the organization of such 
training events. 

Table 1. Overview of the Open Days organized in Schools & Universities 

No Location Date Audience No of Participants 

1 Tartu, Estonia 3-5/2/10 Academics / Researchers 12

2 Thessaloniki, Greece 23/3/10 Academics / Researchers 10

3 Vienna, Austria 23/3/10 School Teachers 15

4 Vienna, Austria 6/5/10 School Teachers 16

5 Budapest, Hungary 28/5/10 School Teachers 8

6 Thessaloniki, Greece 25/5/10 Academics / Researchers 10

7 Budapest, Hungary 31/5/10 Academics / Researchers 18

8 Tallin, Estonia 17/8/10 School Teachers 10

9 Harjumaa, Estonia 18-19/8/10 School Teachers 12

10 Essen, Germany 30/8/10 Academics / Researchers 8

11 Dresden, Germany 11/9/10 School Teachers 14

12 Budapest, Hungary 14-15/9/10 Academics / Researchers 12

13 Vienna, Austria 22/9/10 School Teachers 15

   TOTAL 160

3. METHODOLOGY
A brief outlook on existing literature on evaluating learning 
portals has showed that there are different ways in which a portal 
can be evaluated. One option would be to provide users with 
questionnaires or web-based evaluation tools and analyze the 
feedback provided [12][16]. This evaluation has already been 
carried out in Organic.Edunet with an online questionnaire 
(http://www.ieru.org/organicsurvey/). A second option would be 
to apply an analytics approach, by analyzing the log files of the 
users in order to study their visiting behavior [2][3][6]. Hybrid 
methods using both approaches can also been found in the 
literature [13]. 

3.1 Context of Study 
The analysis carried out in the context of this paper, particularly 
focuses on studying how the usage of the Organic.Edunet portal 
was affected by the organization of the focused training events 
(i.e. Open Days). Overall, thirteen (13) of the Open Days that 
have been organized in five (5) different countries are examined. 
These Open Days had 160 participants comprising mainly from 
school teachers and academic staff. Brief information on these 
Open Days is presented in Table 1: 

141



3.2 Steps Taken and Data Used

In order to study the portal statistics before, during and after the 
Open Days, some variables have been defined and some 
assumptions were made. More specifically, when looking at the 
data on Table 1, it’s apparent that the Open Days took place on 
two distinct periods and not throughout the whole period of 
reference. The first group of Open Days generally took place 
during March & May 2010 (the fact that one Open Day took place 
during early February it is not considered to affect results so 
much) whereas the second group of Open Days took place on 
August-September 2010. Our analysis focuses on the period 
before the two groups of Open Days (Pre-OD), the actual Open 
Days (OD) and finally on the period after the Open Days (Post-
OD), more specifically: 

a) The time before the first group of Open Days is 
symbolized as “Pre-OD”, whereas the first period of 
Open Days is symbolized in all graphs as “OD1”. This 
time following the first group of Open Days is 
symbolized as “Post-OD1”. Respectively, the second 
Open Days’ period is called “OD2” and the period 
following the second group of events took place is 
symbolized as “Post-OD2”, 

b) The portal-related variables selected to be examined 
were: Visits for the portal, Page Views, Unique Visitors, 
Traffic Sources and Most Popular Pages. These 
statistics are calculated for all the periods defined in (a), 

c) The user profile that is also examined in this study, is 
comprised by a set of statistics that try to focus on the 
user-level behavior that can possibly lead to new 
insights on the use of a thematic portal with a focused 
community around it. More specifically, the variables 
measured here include: Average Time on Portal, 
Average Time on Page, Pages Accessed per Visit, 
Visitor Loyalty and Depth of Visit 

Definitions
Deep visitor: Deep visitor would be the visitor that in one visit 
would open more pages than the average pages per visit of all the 
visitors put together for the same period of time.

Statistics for this metric were calculated using the “Depth of 
Visit” available in Google Analytics, showing the percentage of 
users that visited one page per visit, two pages per visit, three 
pages, etc. up to the class of 51-100 pages.
Bounces: Any visit during which the user views only one page and 
then “exits” the portal, is considered as a bounce 
Visitor Loyalty: Loyalty of each visitor shows the times per time 
period (i.e. day, week, and month) that a user visits a website. 
Data post-processing and analysis was carried out using Microsoft 
Excel where exported CSV files from Google Analytics where 
processed. The results are presented in the form of tables and 
figures that focus on the variables that are examined. Column 
charts were chosen to present focused quantitative data whereas 
tables were mainly used to provide overviews of the data per 
region.
The main research question explored in this initial analysis is:  
How do the usage statistics both on the portal level but also on 
the individual user level, change, after a series of training events 
on the portal is organized? E.g. do educators start using more the 
Organic.Edunet Web portal? How is that reflected on the user-
level statistics? 

4. INITIAL RESULTS 

4.1 Portal-level Statistics 
In this section, we present the statistics related to the portal in 
general, trying to identify the way in which they change, if so, 
after the organization of an Open Day.  
Table 4, shows the most famous pages of the portal measuring the 
visits per day that each page attracted. As it was expected, most of 
the visits to the portal originate from the homepage, so this is the 
highest ranking page of all. Simple search (text-based search) is 
also a very popular destination within the portal, but in this case, 
the visitation rates fluctuate less than the ones for the homepage. 
Despite that, comparing all the search functionalities offered, text-
based search ranks on the top. Help on how someone can use 
these functionalities is also visited pretty often, with high 
numbers during the Open Day periods, also. Browsing through 
the resources based on specific criteria (educational level, 
language, difficulty, etc.) is also a widely used search method in 
the portal which follows a steady but decreasing usage. Browsing 
is followed by the Semantic Search which involves searching 
through the terms of a domain specific ontology deployed as a 
tree of terms and concepts.   

Table 2. Overview of portal statistics before, during & after the Open Day periods defined 
Visits per 

day 
Page Views 

per day 
Visitors
per day Direct

Search 
Engines Refer.

Bounces 
per day 

PRE-OD 14,5 121,6 6,9 65% 21% 14% 5,3

OD1 33,4 194,1 19,7 50% 32% 18% 12,7

POST-OD1 32,6 159,9 19,4 43.7% 25.7% 30.6% 14,9

OD2 54,2 250,6 31,9 44.1% 26% 29.9% 23,1

POST-OD2 46,9 182 36,9 24.8% 16.5% 58.7% 26,4

142



Semantic searching seemed to gain some ground before and 
during the second Open Day period, but again it fell to the levels 
of visitation before the Open Days. 

Looking at Table 2, it would have been expected to get higher 
values for the periods of the Open Days in all metrics, when 
compared to the respective “Pre” and “Post” Open Day periods. 
So, for example, from 32.6 visits per day before the second Open 
Day period, we moved to a 54.2 visits per day during the Open 
Day period, which dropped to a 44.9 after the Open Days ended. 
It’s interesting to note that even though the numbers drop after the 
Open Days, they do not decrease to the same extent, showing 
some proof that the Open Day actually brought upon a change to 
the portal usage. One exception to this rule is the case of Page 
Views per day for the second period of Open Days. 

Examining the sources of visit, one could argue that time given, 
the users of the portal are using it more and more, and therefore it 
could be safe to assume that they would also visit the portal 
directly and not through search engines or other referencing 
websites. This assumption is contradicted by findings, as direct 
visits drop from a 65% before all Open Days, gradually to a 
23.9% after their end. Visits generated by search engines do not 
seem to follow and clear pattern (ranging from 18.5% to 32%) 
whereas visits from referencing sites gradually increased from a 
mere 14% to almost 60%! The explanation to this comes from a 
factor outside the portal itself. The Organic.Edunet portal was 
mostly referenced in websites of consortium members in the 
beginning of the period examined but was also promoted through 
a network of affiliated partners which was developed during the 
course of the project, and mainly during the last quarter of 2010. 
In total, 83 affiliated partners put links to Organic.Edunet on their 
websites, which can explain the rise of visits coming from 
referencing websites.

The interpretation of bounces is also interesting. Overall, bounces 
seem not to be affected by the Open Days organized, in the sense 
that they do not fluctuate at all before and after the Open Days, 
but they show a steady increase throughout this period. Bounces 
are of course included in portal visits and relating these two 
numbers it is clear that the visits that did not bounce off the 
portal, went into great depth. For example, for “Post-OD2” 
period, only 18.2 visits per day did not bounce off the portal, but 
these visits generated 127 page views per day, which are almost 
seven pages per visit on an average.

To see if this effect lasted and to which extent, after the 
completion of all Open Days, the period that followed was also 
examined. As it is apparent in Table 3, most of the statistics 
improved, along with a switch in the way that people find the 
portal. More find it through search engines and less directly, 
which makes sense, since during the Open Days people were 

given the URL in advance. Bounces per day are alarmingly high 
and it’s characteristic that they rise more than the respective visits 
per day. Meaning that the portal attracts more visits but the 
biggest part of them leaves the website after looking at one page. 

Table 4, shows the most famous pages of the portal measuring the 
visits per day that each page attracted. As it was expected, most of 
the visits to the portal originate from the homepage, so this is the 
highest ranking page of all. Simple search (text-based search) is 
also a very popular destination within the portal, but in this case, 
the visitation rates fluctuate less than the ones for the homepage. 
Despite that, comparing all the search functionalities offered, text-
based search ranks on the top. Help on how someone can use 
these functionalities is also visited pretty often, with high 
numbers during the Open Day periods, also. Browsing through 
the resources based on specific criteria (educational level, 
language, difficulty, etc.) is also a widely used search method in 
the portal which follows a steady but decreasing usage. Browsing 
is followed by the Semantic Search which involves searching 
through the terms of a domain specific ontology deployed as a 
tree of terms and concepts. Semantic searching seemed to gain 
some ground before and during the second Open Day period, but 
again it fell to the levels of visitation before the Open Days.   
“Educational Scenarios” is a portal page that offers content 
specifically designed for use in the classroom of either schools or 
universities, through elaborated scenarios on various topics 
related to Organic Agriculture and Agroecology. Overall, this 
page shows that despite a promising start it represents the least 
popular page, close to the tag-based search. Finally, tag-based 
search remained largely unused throughout the period examined.  
All these statistics, related to ways in which users search for 
content can greatly influence the interface design of the portal. 

Looking again at the page popularity for the two aforementioned 
periods, it seems that text-based search is becoming more and 
more used, whereas all the other pages’ visitation is declining up 
to 53%. In addition, an interesting finding came through 
examining the top-50 pages for the whole period (1/2/2010 – 
30/6/2011). Amongst them, 11 specific resources (and not portal 
pages per se) related to organic cultivation of vegetables were 
found. More specifically, the resources accessed, contained 
videos/documents, explaining the organic method to cultivate: 
strawberries (1.704 visits), potatoes (1.373 visits), parsley (497 
visits), dill (458 visits), gumbo (422 visits), spinach (357 visits), 
chicory (307 visits), broccoli (303 visits), eggplant (295 visits), 
peas (289 visits) and cauliflower (288 visits). All these pages 
summed up to 6.293 visits, which if examined as one “group” of 
similar pages, have 12.2 visits per day.  

Table 3. Overview of portal statistics during the whole Open Day period, compared to the 8 month period following the Open Days
Visits per 

day 
Page Views 

per day 
Visitors per 

day Direct
Search 
Engines Refer.

Bounces 
per day 

Open Days Period (1/2/2010-30/10/10) 68.4 380.3 42.5 44.3% 31.2% 24.5% 30.8

After Open Days (1/11/10-30/6/11) 144.9 422.7 126.5 12% 78.1% 9.9% 89.1

Difference +111% +11% +197% -73% +150% -60% +189% 

143



Table 4. Most popular pages (visits per day) before, during & after the Open Day periods defined 

Visits per day Pre-OD OD1 Post-OD1 OD2 Post-OD2

Homepage 102 138 118 136 81

Text-based Search 51 61 49 73 59

Educational Scenarios 15 5 7 5 6

Browse 12 14 7 9 5

Semantic Search 6 9 14 14 17

Tag search 4 4 2 2 2

Table 5. Most popular pages (same as Table 4) during the whole Open Day period, compared to the 8 month period following the Open 
Days 

Visits per day Open Days period After Open Days Difference 

Homepage 117.2 83.5 -29% 

Text-based Search 57.4 85.5 +49% 

Educational Scenarios 10.2 6.3 -38% 

Browse 9.8 4.9 -50% 

Semantic Search 26.2 12.6 -52% 

Tag search 3 1.4 -53% 

4.2 User-level Statistics 
In this section, we present the statistics related to the users in 
specific, trying to identify the way in which their behavior 
changes, if so, after the organization of an Open Day.  
Looking at Table 6, it seems that the average time spent on the 
Organic.Edunet portal by each user is dropping throughout the 
period, starting from approximately six minutes, down to almost 
three minutes. So, overall, more visitors came to the portal as it 
was depicted in the portal level statistics, spending all and all, less 

time on the portal as it is shown here. Someone may have 
expected that this would also be reflected in the average time 
spent on each page, this is not the case. Although this time is also 
decreased, the decrease is both not that big and it also fluctuates 
from 59 to 73 seconds. Pages viewed per visit are dropping 
gradually, which was also reflected on the most popular pages. 
Looking at the depth of visit, it seems that the depth in which the 
visitors use the portal, is more or less steady.  

Table 6. Overview of portal statistics before, during & after the Open Day periods defined 

Average time on portal
(sec)

Average time on 
page
(sec)

Pages per visit 
(PpV)

Depth of Visit  
(%>=PpV)

Loyalty 
(%>=1 visit per 

week)

PRE-OD 467 73 8.39 26.85% 5.02%

OD1 269 59 5.8 27.15% 14.97%

POST-OD1 229 63 4.9 26.80% 14.63%

OD2 229 68 4.62 27.03% 21.51%

POST-OD2 188 61 3.42 26.13% 6.44%

User loyalty was measured as the percentage of visitors that came 
back to the portal one or more times during a week. This limit was 
defined in the context of this study to measure the loyalty of the 
users of educational portals, as no such information could be 
retrieved in other studies. Starting from the pre-Open Day period, 
only about 5% of the users would return to the portal more than 
once a week. As expected, during the first period of Open Days, 
this number of loyal visitors tripled to 15% which more or less 
was sustained during the period that followed the first set of Open 
Days. As expected, the second set of Open Days enhanced visitor 
loyalty, with one fifth of the visitors coming back to the portal at 

least once a week. As with most of the stats that were analyzed so 
far, user loyalty seems to have been “helped” by the Open Days, 
increasing during them and returning to a lower level after them, 
which is marginally above the initial loyalty, that was measured 
before any Open Day took place. 
Examining differences in the aforementioned statistics on the long 
run, most of them are declining significantly. Overall, average 
time spent both on a portal level and on the page level, decline as 
pages per visit and loyalty do. Only the depth of visit has risen, 
but when looked at in comparison to pages per visit, it seems that 
this increase is not significant as only 16.5% of visitors visit more 

144



than 3 pages, whereas before 13.3% visited more than 5.6 pages 
per visit. 

Table 7. Overview of portal statistics during the whole Open Day period, compared to the 8 month period following the Open Days

Average
time on 

portal (sec)

Average
time on 

page
(sec)

Pages per 
visit

(PpV)

Depth of Visit  

(%>=PpV)

Loyalty 
(%>=1 visit per 

week)

Open Days Period 
(1/2/2010-30/10/10) 326 58 5.6 13.3% 5.8%

After Open Days 
(1/11/10-30/6/11) 115 40 2.9 16.5% 1.7%

Difference -65% -31% -48% +24% -71% 

5. CONCLUSION

This paper presented an initial analysis of the log files of the 
Organic.Edunet portal, a Web portal that supports educators in 
finding digital learning resources to support and enrich their 
teaching activities. It particularly examined how the portal has 
been used before, during and after the organization of focused 
training events for potential users in several European countries. 
It tried to study any notable changes in both the portal statistics 
overall and also study any changes in the behavior of the users, 
before, during and after the training events, both on a small scale 
(periods of approx. 70 days) but also on a larger scale, examining 
two 7-month periods.
The present paper reached the following conclusions:  

- The portal statistics retained some of the dynamics that 
were created during the Open Days, two months after 
their completion. On the long term, visits were 
increased but most of the statistics declined for the 
period following the end of the project,

- Bounces continued to rise throughout the period 
showing no direct relation to the Open Days organized. 
In general, looking at the greater period of almost 1 year 
and a half, bounces seem to rise hand in hand with the 
visits attracted to the portal, 

- It seems that traditional search functionalities worked 
better for the users that largely did not use tag-based 
search. Semantic search and browsing per topic were 
used, but still not as much as expected, 

- The typical user before the Open Days would not return 
to the portal more than once a week and would spend 
more than six minutes in the portal in total in each visit. 
This user would occasionally visit more pages than the 
portal’s average, taking a “deep visit”. After the end of 
the Open Days, almost 7 months after the last Open 
Day, the same user rarely returns to the portal more than 
once a week and spends significantly less time on it, 

- Many project-related, outside of the portal scope, 
parameters affected the statistics on the portal (i.e. 
affiliation strategy of the project, press releases 
circulated) by drawing visits from a wide scope of 
people that will influence the usage of the portal 

As far as the analysis of the Open Days in groups is concerned, 
one can argue that the results must be compared before and after 
each Open Day, but this was not chosen for two reasons. First of 
all, a preliminary analysis showed that the results were more or 
less as expected showing no research interest when analyzing 
Open Days per country; i.e. traffic is heavier during Open Days, 
with more visits or that time spent on the portal increases due to 
the structured exercises given during the Open Days. The second 
reason had to do with selecting a bigger sample of users by 
grouping the Open Days together, from which safer conclusions 
could be drawn, whereas the limited sample of 15 participants per 
Open Day could not provide that. 

Another issue has to do with the fact that there is no standard 
threshold that can characterize a user as loyal or otherwise, 
because this number is more or less affected by the nature of the 
website examined, the services it offers, etc. In a recent survey by 
Chitika Inc.1, related to Facebook and other popular websites, a 
loyal visitor was the one that came back to the website four or 
more times per week. In the case of an Educational Portal, this 
number might be too high of an expectation, so for the purpose of 
this study, it was decided to set forth our own threshold in 
characterizing someone as “loyal”. 

Future work should focus on delving deeper, trying to elaborate 
the generic research question into a set of research hypotheses 
that will be statistically explored. Through such an analysis, it can 
be decided if a measurable and confident change in the users’ 
behavior is observed. A more detailed analysis can also take place 
focusing on data such as the sections of the portals that are used 
more during and after the training events (i.e. do the users spend 
more time on new features/services that fit their needs?). Finally, 
we are interested to view results in the light of the interaction of 
different audiences with the portal (e.g. academics/researchers, 

                                                                 
1 http://insights.chitika.com/2009/digg-facebook-loyal-readers/ 

145



teachers, public, other). This could also indicate if separate portal 
interfaces are needed to better serve each community.   

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work presented in this paper has been funded with support by 
the European Commission, and more specifically the project 
250525 “Virtual Open Access Agriculture & Aquaculture 
Repository: Sharing Scientific and Scholarly Research related to 
Agriculture, Food, and Environment” of the ICT Policy Support 
Programme (ICT PSP), Theme 4 - Open access to scientific 
information.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Belcher, M., Place, E. & Conole, G. (2000). “Quality 

assurance in subject gateways: creating high quality portals 
on the Internet”. Quality Assurance in Education, 8 (1), 38-
47

[2] Buckley, B.C., Gobert, J.D. and Horwitz P. (2006). Using 
log files to track students' model-based inquiry. In 
Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Learning 
sciences (ICLS '06). International Society of the Learning 
Sciences 57-63. 

[3] Carr, L., Brody, T. and Swan, A. (2008) Repository 
Statistics: What Do We Want to Know? In: Third 
International Conference on Open Repositories 2008, 1-4 
April 2008, Southampton, United Kingdom 

[4] Dubé, L., Bourhis, A., & Jacob, R. (2003). “Towards a 
typology of virtual communities of practice”, Retrieved on 
November 2nd, 2010 from: 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.98
.2079&rep=rep1&type=pdf  

[5] Duncan, C. (2002). Digital Repositories: the ‘back-office of 
e-Learning or all e-Learning?’, in Proc. of ALT-C 2002,
Sunderland, 9-11 September. 

[6] Hasan, L., Morris, A. and Probets, S., (2009). Using Google 
Analytics to Evaluate the Usability of E-Commerce Sites. 
Human Centered Design. In Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference, HCD 2009, Held as Part of HCI 
International 2009, San Diego, CA, USA, July 19-24, 2009 

[7] Holden, C. (2003). From Local Challenges to a Global 
Community: Learning Repositories and the Global Learning 
Repositories Summit. Version 1.0, Academic ADL Co-Lab, 
November 11. 

[8] Katz, R. N. (2002). Web Portals and Higher Education: 
Technologies to Make IT Personal. San Francisco, CA: John 
Wiley & Sons, Retrieved on November 1st, 2010 from: 
http://www.iskme.org/knowledge-
bank/copy_of_articles/information-and-knowledge-
management/pub5006d.pdf

[9] Piearrakos, D. Paliouras, G. Papatheodorou, C. and 
Spyropoulos, C. (2003). Web Usage Mining as a Tool for 
Personalisation: A Survey. User Modeling and User Adapted 
Interaction. Vol. 13, 2003, p.p. 311-372. 

[10] Portals Community Fundamentals (2001). Portal Definition 
and Types of Portals. PortalsCommunity. Retrieved August 
23, 2001, 
http://www.portalscommunity.com/library/fundamentals.cfm
.

[11] Santos Machado, C. and Becker, K. Distance Education: a 
Web Usage Mining Study for the Evaluation of Learning 
Site, In Proc. of the 3rd IEEE Int. Conference on Advanced 
Learning Technologies (ICALT’03), Athens, Greece. June 
2003.

[12] Silius, K. & Tervakari, A-M. (2003). “The usefulness of 
web-based learning environments. The Evaluation Tool into 
the Portal of Finnish Virtual University.” International
Conference on Network Universities and e-learning. 8-9 
May 2003. Valencia. Spain. 

[13] Stacey, E., & Rice, M. (2002). Evaluating an online learning 
environment. Australian Journal of Educational Technology,
18(3), 323–340. 

[14] Tatnall, A.(2005). Web portals – the New Gateways to 
Internet Information and Services. Hershey, PA: Idea Group 
Publishing.

[15] Van Baalen, P., Bloemhof-Ruwaard, J. & Van Heck, E. 
(2005). “Knowledge sharing in an emerging network of 
practice: The role of a knowledge portal”. European
Management Journal, 23(3), 300-314 

[16] Van der Heijden, H. (2002). Factors influencing the usage of 
websites: The case of a generic portal in The Netherlands. 
Information Management 40(6) 541–549. 

[17] Winkler, R. (2001). Portals – The All-In-One Web 
Supersites: Features, Functions, Definition, Taxonomy. SAP 
Design Guild, Edition 3. Retrieved August 23, 2001, 
http://www.sapdesignguild.org/editions/edition3/overview_
edition3.asp.

146



