
Sleepers’ lag - study on motion and attention

Mirko Raca
CHILI

Ecole Polytechnique Federale
de Lausanne

RLC D1 740, Station 20
Lausanne, Switzerland
mirko.raca@epfl.ch

Roland Tormey
CAPE

Ecole Polytechnique Federale
de Lausanne

BI B2 442, Station 7
Lausanne, Switzerland

roland.tormey@epfl.ch

Pierre Dillenbourg
CHILI

Ecole Polytechnique Federale
de Lausanne

RLC D1 740, Station 20
Lausanne, Switzerland

pierre.dillenbourg@epfl.ch

ABSTRACT
Human body-language is one of the richest and most ob-
scure sources of information in inter-personal communica-
tion which we aim to re-introduce into the classroom’s ecosys-
tem. In this paper we present our observations of student-
to-student influence and measurements. We show parallels
with previous theories and formulate a new concept for mea-
suring the level of attention based on synchronization of stu-
dent actions. We observed that the students with lower lev-
els of attention are slower to react then focused students, a
phenomenon we named “sleepers’ lag”.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: Computer-assisted
instruction (CAI); K.3.m [Computers and Education]:
Metrics—performance measures, Miscellaneous

General Terms
Measurement, Orchestration, Classroom attention

Keywords
Motion lag, audience synchronization, classroom attention,
classroom orchestration

1. INTRODUCTION
What is a good indicator of comprehension? Not all stu-

dents are willing to participate during the class period. At
times the most passive of students can surprise you with
their knowledge, and the most active students will under-
achieve. But how to see this during the class when you have
the best chance of correcting a misconception in the lecture’s
material?

Our goal is to provide teachers with a new view of the
classroom, one that lets them assess the impact of their lec-
ture. This is important because the element that will change
on every lecture is the audience mood - and the lecture needs

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for per-
sonal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstract-
ing with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
LAK ’14, March 24 - 28 2014, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-2664-3/14/03$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567574.2567581

to change with it in order to be effective [4]. The adjust-
ment of the teaching style can prove to be a challenging task
for a novice teacher. While aiming to give each student the
amount of attention needed to learn qualitatively, we would
like to point the lecturer to the parts of the classroom which
he or she is not engaging in the lecture. But with all the
different styles of lecturing, how to measure performance
without crippling the teachers with technological aids that
distract more then help?

Our approach is based on the attempt to formalize pure
observation. Without overloading the students with gadgets
and formally structured procedures that dictate a certain
format of the learning experience, we start with a system of
cameras and measurements of human activity in it’s most
basic form - movement.

In this paper we present the method for measuring move-
ment in a class and the procedure used to relate the gathered
information to the students’ subjective perception of atten-
tion. The main contribution is the concept of measuring the
speed of student reactions in class to detect the students
with lower attention. The concept is based on the idea that
the students who are focused on the lecture would react at
the moment the important information was presented, while
the distracted students will be slower to note it. This is the
concept that we call the “sleepers’ lag”. The higher the vari-
ance of reaction time to the stimuli (in our case - teacher’s
presentation) - the lower the attention of the classroom. In
order not to introduce some artificial measuring points dur-
ing the lecture we propose to compare students against each
other in a dyadic fashion.

Our other conclusions go further into exploration on how
the geometry of the classroom and immediate surroundings
affect the individual student. This sets up the ground for
the “student-centred” observation of the classroom, as op-
posed to the dominant trend of exploration which consider
the teacher as the only stimulus present in the classroom of
approximately fifty persons (to which we refer to as“teacher-
centric”).

1.1 Theoretical Background
Traditional classrooms (in both talk format and seating

configuration) remain the dominant format of lecturing on
all levels of formal education today. There have been many
critiques on the format, saying that classroom’s geograph-
ical configuration makes it difficult to develop the teacher-
student relationship and understanding beyond stereotypes
[17]. And while some claim that the current organizational
setup evolved into existence for practical reasons [20] we

36



a) b)

Figure 1: Motion intensity graphs. Horizontal axis represents the time and vertical axis 0-100% of relative
motion of the person (explained in Section 3.1) a) Example of co-movement for two persons. Person 2 shifted
hers seating position (blue line), 2 seconds later, neighbouring Person 1 (marked in green) also started re-
adjusting herself. b) Motion of a single person (dark green trace) overlayed over the average motion of
the whole classroom (gray trace). Horizontal red line marks the 30% threshold that we used for movement
analysis. Color-coded labels on top indicate different events during the class, as described in Section 3.2.
Annotations present here are: Blue rectangles - slide chage; Red periods - question answering periods or
questionnaire filling periods; Green vertical lines - slide animations

can’t ignore difficulties that teachers are facing with keep-
ing students attention over time [31][22] and on-task[27].

The set of theories we group under the name “teacher-
centric” focus on teacher and the teachers impact on the
classroom. As the primary orchestrator of the learning pro-
cess [10][11], teachers take on the responsibility that starts
from educational presentation, pedagogical guidance [7] to
the level of students’ personal transformation [30]. Teacher’s
role in the classroom has been characterized as emotional
labour [17] and cognitively demanding [13]. In many oc-
casions a good teacher is characterized with the ability to
present the teaching material in a way that is acceptable to
students, and this has been shown to be the major difference
between a novice and a experienced teacher [4], confirming
the need for the teacher to be a reflective practitioner [28].
The final conclusion drawn from this small sample of stud-
ies on teachers is that teaching is a job of high responsibility
and mental demand.

Teachers still need to go beyond the instinctive reactions
[19] in order to reach all the students. The geometry of the
classroom, as mentioned before, was already presented as an
emotional barrier for more natural interaction [17]. Students
in the front rows are perceived as “more interested”[8]. Ma-
jority of communication is oriented to the T-shaped region
with the highest concentration of interaction focused on the
front-center of the classroom [1]. The effect does not only af-
fect the teacher’s perception, but students also adjust to the
geometry of the classroom, and the students who seek inter-
action will tend to sit in the high-interaction places [3]. It’s
also shown that the seating arrangement will act as an am-
plification of students interactions - making high-verbalizers
more active in the high-interaction zone, and making low-
verbalizers even less active in the low-interaction zone (the
edge regions of the classroom) [20]. The classroom environ-
ment greatly affects the perception of the teacher and stu-
dents, but this doesn’t always go in favour of the learning
process.

Being far away from the teacher goes beyond just teach-
ers perception. On the “student-centric” side of research,
Daum [9] found that distance from the teacher also has a

real effect on the success of the students. Irrespective of
the position or grades, students have difficulty maintaining
the attention during the whole duration of the class [27].
Even if it’s not clearly quantifiable after how much time
students lose attention, proposed measurements between 10
minutes [31] and 20 minutes [22] are far less then the av-
erage duration of class period. Finn et al. [14] found that
smaller class sizes (less then 15 students) affect the quality
of the lecture in two ways - the teachers took less time to
manage the learning process, but more importantly the stu-
dents’ interaction between themselves also changed for the
better. As the students grow up in the school system, the
relationship between the teacher and the students becomes
less emotionally involved [17] and their participation in the
classroom activities decreases [21]. This seems closely re-
lated to students becoming more accustomed to studying in
a large group, where individual visibility is questioned [14]
and situation is easy for diffusion of responsibility and so-
cial loafing [15]. It’s common for the students to have more
practical goals than purely academic improvement [2].

Our research aims to scaffold teacher’s perception of the
students and raise awareness about students’ reception of
the lecture. Some of the current methods of dealing with the
problem use web-oriented solutions [12], feedback devices in
form of a clicker[6] or mobile phone application [26]. We
look up to the research of unobtrusive measurements [29] in
order not to disturb the classroom eco-system.

2. THEORETICAL ASSUMPTIONS
Our initial hypothesis for the experiment was that we can

detect agreeing groups of students by common behavior pat-
terns and that the people in the visible surroundings affect
the person (student) by their non-verbal cues. We consid-
ered body language in it’s most basic form and compared
the cooccurances of motion between pairs of students. We
also related our observations to students’ level of attention.

From the dual eye-tracking theory, we know that the qual-
ity of collaboration [24] and understanding [18] between two
persons can assessed by analysing the consistency of their
gaze patterns. We draw an analogy with these conclusions in

37



a) b)

Figure 2: Synchronization between two persons over a period of 30 minutes. a) Motion of Person 1 (P1)
over time is shown on the horizontal edge and motion of Person 2 (P2) is shown on the vertical edge. The
matrix itself represents multiplication of motion intensities of respected moments on P1’s and P2’s timeline.
We disregard the motion intersections which are temporarily too far apart and process only the diagonal
which is zoomed in on b). In figure b) horizontal axis represents time from P1’s perspective and the vertical
dimension represents time offset of the motion of P2 in the following way: i) top line indicated P2 moving 4
seconds before P1 ii) second line indicates P2 moving 2 seconds before P1 iii) P1 and P2 moved at the same
time iv) P2 moved 2 seconds after P1 v) P2 moved 4 seconds after P1

the domain of motion in the classroom, with the hypothesis
that students who listen to the teacher will be more likely
to move in synchronized manner, while an absent-minded
student will act on his/hers own internal rhythm. Synchro-
nized motion is not limited to any specific action, but can
be explained on the example of taking notes - attentive stu-
dents would turn pages on the hand-outs and note important
facts as they are presented in class. More than a reaction
to the lectures audio/visual stimulus, motion can be seen as
an agreement of the audience. If the students agree that an
event outside the classroom (e.g. loud noise, truck) is more
important then the lecture, they would still have a synchro-
nized motion (everybody looking through the window) but
caused by a different stimulus than the teacher.

Synchronization in the class was studied in a dyadic fash-
ion, by comparing pairs of any two students. Depending on
relative location between the two students we divided the
dyads into three conditions based on their mutual visibility
(as described in Section 3.3).

Given that learning is not a strictly formalized activity, re-
actions of students can vary or be completely blank. In dual
eye-tracking, a delay of 2 seconds between the speaker’s and
listener’s gaze during the moments of referencing has been
identified [25], with the conclusion that the comprehension
between participants is inversely proportional to the time-
lag. Based on this, we define two movements of the students
as co-movement if it happens within ±4 seconds from each
other (depicted in Figure 1a). We differentiate between i)
perfect synchronization (< 2 sec apart), ii) synchronization
(2-4 sec apart), iii) weak synchronization (4-6 sec apart).
Three periods are displayed on the Figure 2b as the vertical
axis.

The additional, third, period was introduced to take into
account indirect synchronization - when the person is not
reacting to the teachers stimulus but is following the reaction
of others, in which we add 2 seconds for the person to observe

the reaction of others and then reproduce it. This is what
we call the “sleepers lag” - the idea that the persons who are
mimicking attention instead of actually paying attention will
have a delay (a “lag”) in their actions.

3. METHOD
Our setup and method for gathering data is novel in the

classroom environment. We will describe the main points
of the technological part of the method, cover the data-
gathering methodology and our current working sample.

3.1 Motion Analysis
Analysis of the motion is based on tracking feature points

in the video [5]. Our setup consists of three cameras used
for coverage of the students and one observing the teachers
actions. Initial steps of analysis - synchronization of video
streams from all sources and annotating visible regions in
which students reside during the lecture are described in
[23].

Our main challenges in the process of extracting a mea-
surement of motion for further analysis were i) inter-personal
occlusions, ii) perspective distortion, iii) normalization of
the amount of movement recorded from a single person into
a comparable measurement between several persons.

i) Inter-personal occlusions are handled by taking
several pre-processing steps before assigning the motion to
a person. The main idea is that by grouping the motion
vectors into motion tracks, we can more reliably assign the
whole track to a single person, instead of taking each motion
vector as an isolated measurement.

Steps of the process are illustrated in Figure 3. Raw mo-
tion vectors are shown in Figure 3a as purple arrows whose
intensities add to the amount of motion of one person at
one time instance. Motion vectors (v) are next grouped into
tracks (T ) which consist of ”cloud“ of motion vectors over
several frames. The criteria for grouping is based on prox-

38



a) b) c)

Figure 3: Motion detection and grouping. a) Individual motion vectors shown as purple arrows b) Motion
vectors grouped over time into motion tracks which can be assigned to an individual c) Marked student areas
and centres of Gaussian probabilities which model the probability of motion belonging to each student.

imity, direction similarity and intensity of the vectors. For
visualisation purposes, a set of cloud centres from several
frames are connected into a track which is shown in Fig-
ure 3b. Finally the entire track is assigned to the student of
highest probability (gf ) defined by Formula 1. Each student
(g) has a Gaussian distribution centred on the position of his
head (depicted in Figure 3c). The entire track is assessed
over every center (i.e. student) and motion is assigned to
the student with the highest probability.

gf = arg max
g

?
?v?T

p(v|g) (1)

In cases where a student was occluded on more than 80%
of tracked area the movements were undistinguishable from
the person in front of him/her. Depending on the quality of
the measurements for the person in front, either one or both
students were removed from further processing if they were
below a set threshold.

Taking into account that our primary interest was motion
between students, it is important to notice that this method
was designed so that

• a motion occurring between two students would not be
assigned to both students

• large motions spanning several tracked areas would be
assigned to a single person, and not to a group of peo-
ple.

ii) Perspective distortion To compensate for the per-
spective effect, the number of tracking points remains con-
stant over all annotated tracked areas. Second measure was
to normalize the intensity of the motion vector by the diago-
nal of the student region. This ensures that the hand-motion
of the student in the back row will be registered with the
same intensity as the hand-motion of the student in the first
row.

iii) Normalizing the amount of motion Normalizing
the motion of a person has proven to be difficult. We based
our normalization on two premises i) student is on average
sitting still during the class ii) student has at least one full-
body movement in the recorded footage (e.g. pose shift). To
scale this to a range of 0-100% motion, we take the median
value of movement intensity as the 5% motion (which corre-
sponds to small motion/sitting still being registered as 5%
motion), and we verify that given this basic motion intensity
the student reaches 100% motion at least once during the
class. Motion which registers above the threshold of 100% is

clipped to the maximum value. The final motion intensity
over time can be visualized as shown in Figure 1b.

3.2 Experimental procedure
We observed each lecture for the duration of 30 minutes.

After a random interval (average duration 7 minutes) a tone
signal was given which interrupted the lecture. At that time
the students were asked to fill out a questionnaire sampling
their activities and self-reported perception of the classroom.

In addition to student samples, we hand-annotated events
during the class, which were a product of teacher’s action or
a teacher-student interaction. Events were annotated into
following categories: i) slide change ii) slide animation iii)
Question begin/end period iv) Answer begin/end period v)
Other events. Our questionnaire filling periods (which typi-
cally lasted around 1 minute) were designated as “Question
answering” periods. Since they don’t represent a normal
part of a lecture, student activity in those periods were not
taken into consideration in further analysis of data. The
events are shown as annotations in the top part of the time-
line visualization in Figure 1b.

3.2.1 Questionnaires
By using a 10-point Likert scale, participants were regis-

tering their

• attention level,

• perception of the teacher (energetic/boring),

• perception of the classroom attention (high/low),

• importance of the material being presented (impor-
tant/irrelevant).

In addition to this, the questionnaire enumerated activities
that the students did during the previous time-period:

• listening,

• taking notes,

• repeating key ideas,

• thinking about other things,

• interacting with people around you (which was not
scheduled by the classroom activity),

• using your laptop/phone.

Students could check more than one activity.

39



3.2.2 Student sample
We base our results on analysis of two classes, described in

Table 1. Both student groups were in the bachelor program
of EPFL, Switzerland. The teachers were two experienced
lecturers teaching on subjects from social sciences in case of
Class 1 and technical sciences in Class 2. The lectures were
given in different times of the day - one being in the morning,
the other in the late afternoon time, and in different rooms.

Class Size Analysed Female rat. Rows Columns
1 38 29 36.8% 6 7
2 18 14 22.2% 4 5

Table 1: Basic information about analysed classes

Even though we initially consider both classes compara-
ble, small number of students in the second class rendered
conclusions from that observation to be statistically invalid.
We show the results found in the Class 2 sample here to
demonstrate that there is a consistent trend in both cases.

3.3 Location and surroundings
One of our main considerations when thinking how the

student perceives the lecture and came from proxemic zones
[16]. Since the perception of the teacher changes significantly
depending on how far they are from the front, we decided
against normalizing the space in the way it was done for [1],
which would allow us to make one big sample by making the
two classes comparable.

Emulating the proxemics concept in the classroom envi-
ronment we defined 3 zones depicted in Figure 4:

• immediate neighbour - which models “personal space”.
Person to the immediate left or right of the student,
with whom the student shares the desk-space and leg-
space. This is partially dictated by the dimensions of
the student desks which are made for two persons per
desk;

• visible neighbourhood - represents the zone of two rows
in front of the student ±2 persons wide. This rep-
resents the “social zone” of proxemics theory (which
spans from 1.2m - 3m). The zone practically mod-
els the people who would be intentionally or uninten-
tionally observed by the student who’s following the
material on the slides or looking towards the teacher;

• non-visible students - students who are either too far
to the side or behind the individual and can not be
seen without intentional action.

4. OBSERVATIONS

4.1 Questionnaire data
The collected questionnaire data was used primarily as

the basis for further analysis of the collected video material.
Nevertheless we report the condensed findings to depict the
general situation in the classrooms. A general note on the
findings is that because of the small number of samples, we
are reporting our findings with Kendall’s correlation.

Reported levels of attention in both cases were high, with
the mean shifted to around 7. In case of Class 1 µ =

Figure 4: Organization of classroom zones and units
of measurements, top of the image represents the
front of the classroom. v,h - vertical and horizontal
spacing between students is 1 unit of distance (uod)
in our current setup. s - between-row spacing, 1 uod.
d - distance between the professor (center-front of
the classroom) and the analysed student. Light-blue
zone represents the visible students for student at
the location 3rd row, 4th seat. Darker-blue rect-
angle around the student represents his immediate
neighbourhood.

6.822, ? = 2.344, and in case of Class 2 the normal dis-
tribution has parameters µ = 7.444, ? = 1.100 (shown in
Figure 5).

There is a significant correlation between the personal
level of attention and the perceived level of attention of the
entire class (Class 1 ? = 0.477 (p < 0.05); Class 2 ? = 0.413
(p < 0.05)). We considered this to be an interesting way
of expressing dissatisfaction with personal or class perfor-
mance in way that the student would mark bigger difference
between personal and classroom attention if there is a bigger
dissatisfaction with the learning conditions.

Classes were perceived by participants as exhibiting both
high teacher-energy and high levels of student attention.

Class Class attention Teacher energy
mean (variance) mean (variance)

1 6.776 (3.711) 7.783 (1.866)
2 7.125 (3.266) 8.347 (1.920)

Table 2: Parameters of perceived class quality

Activities students reported (shown in Figure 6) show an
expected tendency to report material related activities (lis-
tening to lecture, taking notes and repeating ideas) in higher
attention levels. Off-task activities (“thinking about other
things”, “talking to others”) were reported on all levels up
to the maximum level of attention. Note that the students
in Class 2 were using tablets as part of their regular studies
to view the class material, while that was not required for
Class 1.

We also studied the variation of attention levels over time
in hope of capturing the reported drop of concentration after
10 minutes [31], but found no clear trend.

40



a)

b)

Figure 5: Average attention of students in both
classes was subjectively perceived as high. a) Class
1 (µ = 6.822, ? = 2.344) and b) Class 2 (µ = 7.444, ? =
1.100)

4.2 Motion data
We compared the number of synchronized movements dur-

ing the class period. Synchronized movement is defined as
body movement with more than 30% intensity from each of
the two persons being compared (shown as the horizontal
red line in Figure 1b). The 30% threshold was taken to sep-
arate minor body movements and motion that is likely to be
noticed by others. We took into consideration the visibility
of two persons, meaning that in order for the movement of
Person 1 to be considered as stimulus, it has to be visible to
Person 2. Visibility reasoning was done based on the sitting
location of the two persons.

We compared the average number of synced movements
between pairs sitting immediately next to each other (marked
as the dark-blue region in Figure 4) and other pairs. We
found that immediate neighbours had higher probability of
synchronized moving than a non-neighbouring pair with a
t-test (p ? 0.05), shown in Table 3.

We analysed but found no significant difference in number

a)

b)

Figure 6: Percentage of activities per attention level
in a) Class 1 and b) Class 2. Number of reported
instances was normalized by the total number of in-
stances on that attention level to produce the per-
centages.

Class Neighbouring pairs Other pairs
mean (variance) mean (variance)

1 76.54 (32.47) 54.43 (15.64)
2 63.33 (24.33) 44.88 (18.42

Table 3: Average number of synchronized moments
between immediate neighbours and other pairs

of synchronized moments between the pair from a visible
neighbourhood and the non-visible students.

To compare the motion metrics with the previous findings
of Adams [1] on student activity, we also tested the influence
of teachers proximity to the movement of the students. The
further away students are from the front-center of the class-
room (the point which is the closest to the teacher in both
cases, represented as distance d in Figure 4) the less active
they are (Kendall correlation is ? = ?0.284 (p = 0.03) for
Class 1; and ? = ?0.172 (p = 0.45) for Class 2). Analysing
the samples we have seen the same trend in both cases, even

41



Figure 7: Correlation between distance from teacher
and motion intensity in Class 1; Kendall correlation
? = ?0.284 (p = 0.03)

tough the correlation was insignificant for the second class-
room. Figure 7 shows the correlation for Class 1.

Our third test was to find the correlation of the aver-
age reported level of attention to the reaction speed. The
question was whether students with lower attention levels
were more likely to lag behind a other students in their vis-
ible field. The correlation found had the expected trend in
Kendall correlation ? = ?0.259 but was marginally insignif-
icant (p = 0.06) on the sample size of 29 students of the
Class 1. The result is shown in Figure 8. Class 2 correla-
tion had a similar trend but was not statistically significant
? = ?0.222 (p = 0.32). The data thus suggests that there is
a phenomenon of “sleeper’s lag”, but the current sample is
not conclusive. Also, the difference in average speed of re-
action is in sub-second intervals, which leads us to question
if this would be noticeable to the teacher’s eye without the
technological enhancement of the classroom.

5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we demonstrated our concept of measuring

speed of reaction in the student population of classroom.
We gave insight about the subjective perception of the class-
room attention gathered with the questionnaire, and shown
that the students will project their level of attention onto
others in their reports. Our first conclusion about existing
synchronization of motion between immediate neighbours
shows that there might be an underlying reason for this,
and that two persons can affect each other just by sitting
together without actual direct interaction.

We found a similarity with previous studies on the affect
of teacher proximity on students [1] and found that students
who are further away not only participate less, but also move
less.

Finally, we proposed a new way of evaluating the overall
attention of the classroom by comparing pairs of students
and analysing how synchronous they move. By comparing
the motion results to the data gathered in the questionnaire
we showed that there is a correlation between slower reaction
time and lower levels of reported attention - the “sleepers’

Figure 8: Average motion lag compared with the
average level of attention in Class 1. Kendall corre-
lation ? = ?0.259 (p = 0.06).

lag”, but our data was not conclusive.
We haven’t touched on the subject of presenting the infor-

mation to the teachers during the lecture, and we’re plan-
ning on starting a dialogue with the participating teachers
to find the best representation for displaying the information
during the lecture. Our next steps are to confirm the find-
ings on a broader sample of students and continue to refine
the technological methods. In addition to the “sleepers lag”
we would also like to explore further the phenomenon which
we call the“distraction ripples” - assuming the transitivity of
the motion-syncing, we would like to capture the spreading
of influence of one class-member to people around him/her.
We are also interested to correlate how well do these “rip-
ples” spread in high-attention and low-attention groups of
students, in order to make a new metric of class attention.

In addition to motion, we aim to introduce additional cues
into our reasoning about student attention and perception
of the class, specifically - gaze direction. The end goal is to
have a holistic image of the classroom life in order to find
the most salient cues that can be unobtrusively collected.
Our intention is that in the end, the entire system would
act as a training experience for the novice teachers.

Stepping back from the trend of individual learning with
massive on-line open courses (MOOCs), classrooms remain
the dominant form of lecturing on all educational levels. In-
troducing technological solutions to the classroom has the
potential of huge impact on the way the students learn. By
not excluding the teachers but supplementing their obser-
vations with advanced measurements we hope to create a
blend which would be superior to the current methods and
beneficial for both students and teachers.

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been sponsored by the ProDoc SNF Grant,

project PDFMP1 135108. We would also like to thank all
of the experiment participants (students and teachers) for
their help in gathering the data.

42



7. REFERENCES
[1] R. S. Adams. Location as a feature of instructional

interaction. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly of Behavior and
Development, 15(4):309–321, 1969.

[2] J. D. Allen. Classroom management: Studentsa?A?Z?
perspectives, goals, and strategies. American
Educational Research Journal, 23(3):437–459, 1986.

[3] I. Altman and E. E. Lett. The ecology of interpersonal
relationships: A classification system and conceptual
model. Social and psychological factors in stress, pages
177–201, 1970.

[4] H. Borko and C. Livingston. Cognition and
improvisation: Differences in mathematics instruction
by expert and novice teachers. American educational
research journal, 26(4):473–498, 1989.

[5] J.-Y. Bouguet. Pyramidal implementation of the affine
lucas kanade feature tracker description of the
algorithm. Intel Corporation, 2001.

[6] J. E. Caldwell. Clickers in the large classroom: current
research and best-practice tips. CBE-Life Sciences
Education, 6(1):9–20, 2007.

[7] R. P. Corcoran and R. Tormey. Developing
Emotionally Competent Teachers; Emotional
Intelligence and Pre-Service Teacher Education. Peter
Lang, 2012.

[8] J. A. Daly and A. Suite. Classroom seating choice and
teacher perceptions of students. The Journal of
Experimental Educational, pages 64–69, 1981.

[9] J. Daum. Proxemics in the classroom: Speaker-subject
distance and educational performance. In annual
meeting of Southeastern Psychological Association,
1972.

[10] P. Dillenbourg and P. Jermann. Technology for
classroom orchestration. New Science of Learning,
pages 525–552, 2010.

[11] P. Dillenbourg, G. Zufferey, H. Alavi, P. Jermann,
S. Do-Lenhand, Q. Bonnard, S. Cuendet, and
F. Kaplan. Classroom orchestration: The third circle
of usability. In International Conference on Computer
Supported Collaborative Learning Proceedings, pages
510–517. 9th International Conference on Computer
Supported Collaborative Learning, 2011.

[12] A. L. Dyckhoff, V. Lukarov, A. Muslim, M. A. Chatti,
and U. Schroeder. Supporting action research with
learning analytics. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Learning Analytics and
Knowledge, pages 220–229. ACM, 2013.

[13] E. T. Emmer and L. M. Stough. Classroom
management: A critical part of educational
psychology, with implications for teacher education.
Educational Psychologist, 36(2):103–112, 2001.

[14] J. D. Finn, G. M. Pannozzo, and C. M. Achilles. The
“why’s” of class size: Student behavior in small classes.
Review of Educational Research, 73(3):321–368, 2003.

[15] D. R. Forsyth. Group dynamics. CengageBrain. com,
2009.

[16] E. T. Hall. The hidden dimension. Anchor Books New
York, 1969.

[17] A. Hargreaves. Mixed emotions: Teachers‘ perceptions
of their interactions with students. Teaching and
teacher education, 16(8):811–826, 2000.

[18] P. Jermann and M.-A. Nu?ssli. Effects of sharing text
selections on gaze cross-recurrence and interaction
quality in a pair programming task. In Proceedings of
the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, pages 1125–1134. ACM, 2012.

[19] D. Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan,
2011.

[20] M. Koneya. Location and interaction in
row-and-column seating arrangements. Environment
and Behavior, 8(2):265–282, 1976.

[21] H. M. Marks. Student engagement in instructional
activity: Patterns in the elementary, middle, and high
school years. American educational research journal,
37(1):153–184, 2000.

[22] J. Middendorf and A. Kalish. The “change-up” in
lectures. In Natl. Teach. Learn. Forum, volume 5,
pages 1–5. Wiley Online Library, 1996.

[23] M. Raca and P. Dillenbourg. System for assessing
classroom attention. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Learning Analytics and
Knowledge, pages 265–269. ACM, 2013.

[24] D. C. Richardson and R. Dale. Looking to understand:
The coupling between speakers’ and listeners’ eye
movements and its relationship to discourse
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 29(6):1045–1060,
2005.

[25] D. C. Richardson, R. Dale, and N. Z. Kirkham. The
art of conversation is coordination common ground
and the coupling of eye movements during dialogue.
Psychological science, 18(5):407–413, 2007.

[26] V. Rivera-Pelayo, J. Munk, V. Zacharias, and
S. Braun. Live interest meter: learning from quantified
feedback in mass lectures. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Learning Analytics and
Knowledge, pages 23–27. ACM, 2013.

[27] D. Rosengrant, D. Hearrington, K. Alvarado, and
D. Keeble. Following student gaze patterns in physical
science lectures. In AIP Conference Proceedings,
volume 1413, page 323, 2012.

[28] D. Schon. The reflective practitioner: How
professionals think in action, volume 5126. Basic
Books, 1984.

[29] E. J. Webb, D. T. Campbell, R. D. Schwartz, and
L. Sechrest. Unobtrusive measures, volume 2. SAGE
Publications, Incorporated, 1999.

[30] J. Whitcomb, H. Borko, and D. Liston. Why teach?
part ii. Journal of Teacher Education, 2008.

[31] K. Wilson and J. H. Korn. Attention during lectures:
Beyond ten minutes. Teaching of Psychology, pages
85–89, December 2007.

43





