
Learn-B: A Social Analytics-enabled Tool for  

Self-regulated Workplace Learning 
Melody Siadaty1, 2 , Dragan Gaševi?1, 2, Jelena Jovanovi?1,2, 3 , Nikola Miliki?3,  

Zoran Jeremi?3, Liaqat Ali1, Aleksandar Giljanovi?2 and Marek Hatala2 
 

1 School of Computing and Information Systems, Athabasca University, Canada 
2 School of Interactive Arts and Technology, Simon Fraser University, Canada 

3 FON-School of Business Administration, University of Belgrade, Serbia 
 

melody_siadaty@sfu.ca, dgasevic@acm.org, jeljov@gmail.com, nikola.milikic@gmail.com,  
zoran.jeremic@gmail.com, liaqata@sfu.ca, aleksgiljanovic@gmail.com, mhatala@sfu.ca 

   

ABSTRACT  

In this design briefing, we introduce the Learn-B environment, 

our attempt in designing and implementing a research prototype 

to address some of the challenges inherent in workplace learn-

ing: the informal aspect of workplace learning requires know-

ledge workers to be supported in their self-regulatory learning 

(SRL) processes, whilst its social nature draws attention to the 

role of collective in those processes. Moreover, learning at 

workplace is contextual and on-demand, thus requiring organi-

zations to recognize and motivate the learning and knowledge 

building activities of their employees, where individual learn-

ing goals are harmonized with those of the organization. In par-

ticular, we focus on the analytics-based features of Learn-B, il-

lustrate their design and current implementation, and discuss 

how each of them is hypothesized to target the above chal-

lenges.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors  
J.1 [Administrative Data Processing] Education; K.3.1 

[Computer Uses in Education] Collaborative learning 

Keywords 
Learning Analytics, workplace learning, self-regulated learning, 

collaborative learning, semantic technologies 

1. INTRODUCTION 
In the last few years, the growing emergence and acceptance of 

social software tools, social media and Social Web (Web 2.0) 

paradigm have brought forth a new perspective to the concept 

of learning  [4] [14] [7], demonstrating a transition from conven-
tional pedagogical approaches to a more social and collective 

knowledge paradigm of learning, in that creativity, social-

embeddedness, and the capacity to gain knowledge from a sea 

of collective are highly expected and valued  [9] [13].  

Such a perspective to learning is especially important in the 

context of workplace  [5], where learning is social, affects and is 
affected by the social context and the available collective 

knowledge.  

To keep up with and adapt to the contextual needs of workplace 

settings, learning at workplace mostly happens as a by-product 

of work. This “on-demand” and informal approach to learning 

 [1] requires contemporary knowledge workers to have Self-
Regulatory Learning (SRL) skills in identifying their learning 

needs and conducting appropriate learning strategies to attain 

them  [8]. The majority of conventional interpretations of SRL 
are based on an individualistic perspective, where the impact of 

the collective is often assumed less significant than individual-

based factors  [6]. Such perspectives contradict the nature of the 
workplace, where individuals’ work and learning activities are 

highly social and collective-centred. The recent research on 

workplace learning clearly stresses the role of the collective 

and other forms of social exchange in both individual learning 

and organizational development  [4] [1]; findings on patterns of 
defining learning goals in the workplace show that in the proc-

ess of setting and managing their learning goals, individuals 

draw from and contribute to the collective knowledge in their 

organization  [8].   

To support users’ in their SRL processes in modern workplaces 

as well as scaffolding organizational learning, there is a need 

for systems that collect learning–related contributions, re-

aggregate and analyse them to create further new knowledge, 

and make this new knowledge available to users. Such new 

knowledge can be beneficial to users in every step of their 

learning process from identifying their learning needs and set-

ting their goals (e.g. they can get aware how other employees 

with similar organizational positions have defined their goals), 

to monitoring their learning progress and comparing it with that 

of their colleagues who hold the same position or work in the 

same project, and sharing and documenting their learning ex-

periences (e.g. by observing how actively their colleagues are 

sharing their learning experiences and comparing it with their 

own sharing activities, or to see how their shared knowledge 

has been useful to other members of the organization).   

Designing systems that unlock the collective knowledge, and 

the collective intelligence in higher levels of inference for the 

purpose of scaffolding learning, however, is not a straightfor-

ward task  [4]. Semantic technologies and Linked Data para-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 

LAK12, April 29– May 2, 2012, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1111-3/12/04…$10.00. 

 

115



digm could provide the required technical backbone for tack-

ling this challenge. Today’s knowledge workers often use di-

verse tools and services in their everyday working and learning 

practices; therefore, the traces and outcomes of their activities 

are dispersed among different tools/services that often lack the 

capability of interchanging and/or integrating user’s data. If 

properly applied, the Linked Data paradigm and the associated 

Semantic Web technologies would enable meaningful data in-

tegration and knowledge structuring.  

Needless to say, to be successfully deployed and to lead to the 

expected results, these advanced technologies need to be sup-

ported by proper pedagogical and motivational approaches. We 

base the foundations of our pursued pedagogical approach on a 

well-known organizational knowledge building model proposed 

by Nonaka and Takeuchi  [10] (to address the challenge of har-
monizing individual and organizational learning), and extend it 

with SRL practices (to support users’ in initiating and conduct-

ing their individual learning processes)  [11], and motivational 

elements  [12] (to address the challenge of motivating users to 
share their personal knowledge and learning experiences, and 

contributing to the collective knowledge in their organization).  

For this pedagogical framework to work effectively, we hypo-

thesize that Learning Analytics (i.e. collecting users’ contribu-

tions, aggregating them, analyzing them and reporting back to 

the users and the organization) play an important role: it allows 

for the organization to better align its learning objectives with 

those of its employees by knowing about their learning practic-

es; it supports users’ SRL processes by providing them with the 

necessary input from the social context of the workplace; and it 

enhances the motivation of individuals to take part in learning 

and knowledge building activities and sharing their experiences 

by providing them with feedback from the collective. In this de-

sign briefing, we introduce the Learn-B environment, our at-

tempt in designing and implementing a research prototype to 

support workplace learning that addresses the above chal-

lenges. Learn-B stands for Learning Biosis (“biosis” meaning a 

way of life), i.e. learning as a way of life. In particular, in this 

design briefing we report on the learning analytics aspects pre-

sently supported by Learn-B.  

2. THE LEARN-B ENVIRONMENT 
The design of the Learn-B environment was driven by the re-

quirements for effective learning and knowledge building in or-

ganizational settings. It is designed to integrate different tools 

that employees often interact with during their everyday (work-

ing and learning) practices. In particular, so far we have inte-

grated a wiki (MediaWiki), a social networking and collabora-

tion platform (Elgg), and a bookmarking tool (Tagging tool – 

implemented within this research as a Firefox plugin). Learn-B 

serves as the central hub for this integrated environment, and 

relies on an interlinked set of ontologies as its underlying 

(linked) data model. These ontologies are available at: 

http://goo.gl/Saui4. A current demo of the main functionalities 

of the Learn-B environment is available at: http://goo.gl/RaiIm.  

Figure 1 illustrates the multi-layer architecture of Learn-B 

which can be adapted to and applied in a wide range of organi-

zations. There is no strong boundary between the layers and 

components defined within each layer. In this design briefing, 

we only focus on the Analytics-enabled functionalities provided 

within the Processing Service Group.  This service group is 

responsible for tracking all the events that happen in Learn-B, 

and other integrated tools (i.e. MediaWiki, Elgg and the Tag-

ging Tool), processing and analyzing the gathered data, and 

providing users with the resulting feedback and analytics. In 

particular, Event Dispatcher (Figure 1.K) is responsible for 

processing all of the events occurring in the Learn-B environ-

ment, storing them into the RDF repository (Figure 1.A) and 

distributing them to other services. Analytics Service (Figure 

1.L) is responsible for processing and analyzing the data about 

users’ learning activities and their interaction with diverse 

kinds of learning resources. It makes use of the interaction data 

stored in the RDF repository to provide users with feedback, 

primarily through different kinds of visualizations, to support 

them in planning, performing and monitoring their learning 

process. 

 

Figure 1. The architecture of the Learn-B Environment  

Usage Information is one type of the provided analytics which 

comes in the form of statistics, Social Waves or the collective 

stand. Derived from the collected knowledge within the system, 

this functionality supports the recommender services (Figure 

1.H-I) and more importantly, provides users with analytics rep-

resenting the collective knowledge around a resource and as-

sists them in planning their learning processes. Statistics and 

Social Wave analytics are implemented as a set of various visu-

alization charts, each conveying the intended feedback/analytics 

data. The feedback reflecting the collective stand about a learn-

ing resource comes in diverse forms such as annotations, reflec-

tions (e.g. comments and notes), ratings and tags of other users.  

For instance, Figure 2 illustrates how each organizational ob-

jective, defined in terms of competences, is accompanied by 

statistical analytics such as the number of users who have ac-

quired that competence and their roles in the organization, and 

the Social Wave stream of that competence showing the activi-

ties performed on or events happened around it over a certain 

period. Such analytics represent the “popularity” of a given 

competence, indicating whether and to what extent it is (so-

cially) alive. The comments of other users can be viewed under 

the Comments tab in Figure 2. The recommendation of a learn-

ing path, via the Learning Path Recommender service (Figure 

1.H), to achieve a competence (in this research, each learning 

path is comprised of one or more learning activities that lead to 

the attainment of a specific competence at a specific level) is 

further augmented with analytics such as the number of users 

who have successfully finished this learning path or a revision 

of it, or are still working on it, or have abandoned it. Users can 

also see the organizational positions of users in each of the 

above categories (i.e. active, finished, abandoned). Similar to 

the competences, each learning activity is also accompanied by 

Social stream and collective stand analytics.    

116



 

 

Figure 2. Analytics - Usage Information provided for each organizational objective a) Statistics b) Social Waves 

Progress-o-meters represent another type of the provided ana-

lytics; they aid users to monitor their learning progress in the 

organizational context, by showing them their progress flow in 

achieving their defined learning goals and the competences in-

cluded within those goals, and are implemented as a set of line 

charts (Figure 3). Moreover, Progress-o-meters provide users 

with a comparison of their progress flow with that of their col-

leagues who have the same learning goal (e.g., a goal shared by 

the members of a project), or are working on the same compe-

tence. We hypothesize that observing oneself within the social 

context of the organization helps users to monitor their progress 

toward achieving their goals, thus also assisting them in further 

regulating their learning strategies.  

 

Figure 3. Analytics – Progress-o-meters 

Knowledge Sharing Profiles inform users of their reflections, in 

terms of sharing their learning resources, within an organiza-

tion. Via this type of provided analytics, users can see how ac-

tively they are sharing each of their learning resources, and also 

compare their sharing activities with the average within their 

organization (Figure 4). As a factor targeting individuals’ ex-

trinsic motivation  [12], we hypothesize that such feedback can 
help users to regulate their knowledge sharing activities. 

 

Figure 4. Analytics – Knowledge Sharing Profiles 

Motivational Messages are another type of provided analytics 

which aim to support users’ stronger engagement with the sys-

tem. Generally, a user (learner) model represents user knowl-

edge, goals, interests, and other features that allow for better 

recommendations or provided adaptivity by the sys-

tem. Opening the learner model may bring additional benefits 

to users, allowing them to take charge of their own learning ex-

perience. However, collecting explicit data from users is often 

challenging and a strong motivation is needed on learners’ part 

to provide explicit feedback about their learning  [1]. Motiva-
tional Messages aim to tackle this challenge by providing users 

with personalized messages indicating to what extent the col-

lective has opened their models in terms of sharing their per-

sonal preferences and learning experiences. For instance, Fig-

ure 5 shows a set of motivational messages related to the de-

gree of completeness of a user’s ‘preferences’ compared to oth-

er users, where these preferences are used to adjust the recom-

mendations generated for the user.   

117



 

Figure 5. Analytics – Motivational Messages 

Last but not least, the Analytics Service supports the harmoni-

zation of individual and organizational learning objectives. 

Browsing the different forms of Analytics available for a cer-

tain competence, updates the managers of an organization on, 

for instance, how frequently this specific competence has been 

used within the organization, in the context of which learning 

goals it has been used, by users of what organizational posi-

tions, and what the main issues regarding this competence are. 

This allows managers to apply any necessary modifications in 

the definition of the competence itself or the learning paths as-

sociated with it, to better harmonize organizational and indi-

vidual learning needs. Also discovery of emerging competences 

or other learning resources can be learned via this service. On 

the other hand, if some user-created competences are frequently 

being re-used by members of an organization; the managers 

might consider them as ‘emerging’ organizational goals. As can 

be seen, organizational goals are also dynamic and can evolve 

via the contributions of the community members. Accordingly, 

this targets individuals’ intrinsic motivation for knowledge 

sharing by giving them the feeling of being competent in con-

tributing to the organization’s goals and objectives. 

3. CONCLUSIONS  
In this design briefing, we demonstrated the analytics-based 

features of Learn-B, which are built on Semantic technologies 

and Linked Data paradigm, and backed with an extended peda-

gogical and motivational framework. In our empirical work 

with Learn-B, we aim to answer if and to what extend these 

features, along with the other functionalities provided within 

Learn-B, address the existing challenges in supporting 

workplace learning. In particular, to support users’ self-

regulatory practices in the context of workplace learning, we 

hypothesize that the usage information analytics accompanying 

each learning resource in Learn-B (i.e. statistics, Social Waves 

and the collective stand) assist users in planning their learning 

goals; Progress-o-meters, on the other hand, provide users with 

feedback on their progress flow and thus help them with moni-

toring and evaluating their learning progress. Knowledge Shar-

ing Profiles inform users of their reflections, in terms of shar-

ing their learning resources and experiences within an organi-

zation. Accordingly, we propose that these profiles support us-

ers to align their reflections and sharing of their learning re-

sources and experiences. Motivational Messages are another 

analytics-based means designed to foster users’ contributions 

and to motivate them to provide higher quality inputs to the 

system.  

4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This demonstration was partially supported/co-funded by 

NSERC, Athabasca University, and the European Community 

under the Information and Communication Technologies theme 

of the 7th Framework Program for R&D. This document does 

not represent the opinion of NSERC, Athabasca University, and 

the European Community, and NSERC, Athabasca University, 

and the European Community are not responsible for any use 

that might be made of its content. 

5. REFERENCES 
[1] Bull, S., Kay, J. 2010. Open Learner Models. In R. Nkam-

bou, J. Bordeau & R. Miziguchi (eds), Advances in Intel-

ligent Tutoring Systems, Springer. 301-322. 

[2] Fenwick, T. 2008. Understanding relations of individual-

collective learning in work: A review of research. Man-

agement Learning. 39 (3), 227-243. 

[3] Fischer, G. 2000. Lifelong Learning - More Than Train-

ing. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 11 (3/4), 

265-294. 

[4] Gruber, T. 2008. Collective Knowledge Systems: Where 

the Social Web meets the Semantic Web. Journal of Web 

Semantics, 6(1), pp. 4-13. 

[5] Hart, J. 2010. The State of Learning in the Workplace To-
day. Center for Learning and Performance Technologies 

website. Available online at: http://goo.gl/Ipt2g 

[6] Jackson, T., MacKenzie, J., & Hobfoll, S. E. 2000. Com-
munal aspects of self-regulation. In M. Boekaerts, P. R. 

Pintrich, and M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-

regulation. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 275-299.  

[7] Jovanovic, J., Gasevic, D., Torniai, C., Bateman, S., Hata-
la, M. 2009. The Social Semantic Web in Intelligent 

Learning Environments - State of the Art and Future Chal-

lenges. Interactive Learning Environments, 17(4), 273-

308. 

[8] Littlejohn, A., Margaryan, A, and Milligan, C. 2009. 
Charting collective knowledge: Supporting self-regulated 

learning in the workplace. In. Proc. of the 9th IEEE Inter-

national Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, 

208-212. 

[9] McLoughlin, C. and Lee, M.J.W. 2010. Pedagogy 2.0: 
Critical challenges and responses to Web 2.0 and social 

software in tertiary teaching. In M.J.W. Lee & C. 

McLoughlin (Eds), Web 2.0-based e-learning: applying 

social informatics for tertiary teaching. Hershey, PA: In-

formation Science Reference. 43–69. 

[10] Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. 1995. The knowledge-creating 
company. How Japanese companies create the dynamics of 

innovation. New York: Oxford University Press. 

[11] Siadaty, M., Jovanovi?, J., Pata, K., Holocher-Ertl, T., 
Gaševi?, D., Miliki?, N. 2011. A Semantic Web-enabled 

Tool for Self-Regulated Learning in the Workplace. In 

Proc. 11th IEEE Intl. Conf. on Advanced Learning Tech-

nologies. (Athens, Athens, GA , USA, 2011). 66-70. 

[12] Siadaty, M., Jovanovi?, J., Gaševi?, D., Jeremi?, Z., Ho-
locher-Ertl, T. 2010.  Leveraging Semantic Technologies 

118



for Harmonization of Individual and Organizational Learn-

ing. In Proc. 5th Euro. Conf. Technology-enhanced Learn-

ing. (Barcelona, Spain, 2010). 340-356. 

[13] Tynjälä, P. 2008. Perspectives into learning at the 

workplace, Educational Research Review, 3, 130-154.   

[14] Vassileva, J. 2008. Towards Social Learning Environ-

ments, IEEE Trans. on Learning Technologies, 1 (4), 199-

214. 

 

119





