
Orchestrating of complex inquiry: Three roles for learning 
analytics in a smart classroom infrastructure

James D. Slotta  
OISE/University of Toronto 

252 Bloor Street West,  
Toronto, Ontario 

jslotta@gmail.com 

Mike Tissenbaum 
OISE/University of Toronto 

252 Bloor Street West,  
Toronto, Ontario 

mike.tissenbaum@utoronto.ca 

Michelle Lui 
OISE/University of Toronto 

252 Bloor Street West,  
Toronto, Ontario 

michelle.lui@utoronto.ca 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
This paper presents our research of a pedagogical model known as 
Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI), focusing on our design 
of a technological infrastructure for the orchestration of the 
complex CSCL scripts that characterize KCI curricula. We first 
introduce the KCI model including some basic design principles, 
and describe its dependency on real time learning analytics. Next, 
we describe our technology, known as SAIL Smart Space (S3), 
which provides scaffolding and analytic support of sequenced 
interactions amongst people, materials, tools and environments. We 
outline the critical role of the teacher in our designs and describe 
how S3 supports their active role in orchestration. Finally we 
outline two implementations of KCI/S3 and the role of learning 
analytics, in supporting dynamic collective visualizations, real time 
orchestrational logic, and ambient displays. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.1 Computer Uses in Education: Collaborative learning  

General Terms 
Design 

Keywords 
orchestration, smart classrooms, intelligent agents, ambient display 

1. INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents recent work from Encore Lab 
(http://encorelab.org) in researching a pedagogical model known as 
Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI), and a supporting 
technology infrastructure for “smart classrooms.”  KCI describes a 
class of pedagogical designs where students engage in carefully 
scripted inquiry and collaborative knowledge construction to 
achieve science learning goals [17, 18]. KCI curriculum includes 
complex forms of interaction such as aggregated observations, (i.e., 
by the classroom community), and scripted collaborations within 
and between groups (e.g., via jigsaw). Individuals are scaffolded in 
all aspects of the curriculum, as they engage in reflection, critique, 
discussion, or design activities performed individually, in groups, 
or as a wider learning community. Our designs rely on a 
sophisticated technology infrastructure that supports the 
orchestration of KCI curriculum through real-time coordination of 

devices, tools and materials, student group and role assignments 
across multiple contexts: in school, at home, and in field-based 
activities. 

This paper begins by reviewing KCI, and our open source software 
framework, then presents two recent KCI curricula with a focus on 
their learning analytic features. Specifically, we describe our 
application of real time data mining of student contributions, using 
intelligent agents and a messaging software architecture, to inform: 
(1) the dynamic, emergent representation of aggregated student 
contributions, which provides a crucial reference and input for 
ongoing classroom activities and (2) the orchestration of complex 
inquiry scripts, including pedagogical logic that is often left 
“unbound” (i.e., with variable assignments that can only be fixed 
after student data becomes available to analyze), and (3) the 
changing of state for ambient representations of individual, group 
and collective progress during the activity, which also contributes 
greatly to the orchestration of KCI scripts.  

2. KNOWLEDGE COMMUNITY AND 
INQUIRY 
KCI curriculum is developed through a sustained co-design effort 
including teachers, researchers, technology developers, and 
interaction designers [12]. Students work in parallel, building on 
one another’s contributions to develop a “community knowledge 
base” that is indexed to the content domain learning goals (e.g., in a 
science topic) [15, 16]. In KCI, inquiry activities are designed to 
engage students individually and in small groups where they make 
use of their community knowledge base as a resource for carefully 
scripted inquiry designs.  The designed curriculum constitutes a 
“script” that depends upon real-time executive decisions or 
assignments, and involves student-contributed content, social 
tagging, ubiquitous computing, and immersive environments. The 
script is “orchestrated” by the teacher, who in turn is enabled by a 
smart classroom learning environment, that includes ambient 
displays and spatial mapping of activities. 

Recent KCI designs have included tangible and embodied 
interactions with the environment (e.g., spatially dependent 
interactions within the classroom, or user contributed observations 
from the students’ neighborhood), scaffolded by tablet computers 
that track student location and guide data collection activities. The 
teacher’s role is that of an expert collaborator or mentor, 
responding to student ideas as they emerge, and orchestrating the 
pedagogical flow of activities. Teachers are not just a “guide on the 
side” – an image or assignment that often confuses teachers and 
leaves them “sidelined” by overly scaffolded learning designs with 
no explicit role for the teacher. Rather, KCI specifies an interaction 
script that includes a clear and consequential role for the teacher in 
orchestrating the design.  

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the 
first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others 
than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To 
copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to 
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
LAK '13, April 08 - 12 2013, Leuven, Belgium 
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04…$15.00. 

270



In a recent KCI activity designed for high school physics, we 
engaged students in solving ill structured problems in a smart 
classroom setting, where they worked collaboratively at various 
stations within the room, inputting their tags and votes on personal 
tablet computers, then collaborating to negotiate a consensus. After 
setting up the problems for solution, the group “submitted” their 
readiness, and the teacher was notified (on his own tablet) that the 
group was ready for a debriefing. The teacher then walked over to 
that group’s station and consulted with them about their problem 
set-up. If they had done a sufficiently detailed and accurate job, the 
teacher touched a “go ahead” button on his tablet, and the student 
tablets were refreshed with new tasks for the next activity in the 
script. If the teacher felt that the students needed to refine their set-
up, he could have them work on it some more and, when ready, re-
alert him to review their work again. 

The example above illustrates the current focus of our research, 
with regard to scaffolding technologies and learning analytics. 
Working closely with the classroom teacher, we develop 
substantive curricula – typically whole semester or multi-week –
according to the KCI model [16].  Following the designed script, 
we then develop all materials and scaffolding for activities at the 
individual, small group and whole class levels. Internet-based 
software collects student contributions, and intelligent agents 
perform real-time data mining to compile an aggregated 
representation of student contributions presented on a Smartboard 
at the front of the room. Students respond to this emergent view, 
perhaps identifying cells in a table where they disagree or need 
more data. Teachers can be prompted on their own personal tablets 
for a variety of interactions, and ambient displays provide 
secondary channels of information to support orchestration.  

Studies of KCI in smart classroom environments have included 
many technical challenges and innovations, but two in particular 
seem relevant to the issue of learning analytics and knowledge. 
First, there is a challenge of dynamically representing students’ 
individual and collective “knowledge contributions.”  How should 
we capture the running aggregation of student observations? In 
table form or as a tag graph? There are numerous ways to display 
any given aggregate; how do we choose the right one? The 
aggregate representation (AR) that we require is one that reveals 
progress and productive patterns, promoting discourse and 
productive inquiry decisions amongst students and teachers. 
Second, there is a challenge of orchestrating the often “unbound” 
pedagogical script.  That is, the script may specify that it needs all 
students to be sorted into four groups, according to the four most 
common social tags, but cannot specify, a priori, what those tags 
will be, nor which students will be best suited to what groups.  
Only by actively monitoring student-contributed data in real time 
can the system scaffold such complex and open specifications of 
inquiry scripts. 

3. SMART CLASSROOM TECHNOLOGY  
Our recent work has focused on scripting and orchestration of KCI 
learning designs [3, 5]. The “script” provides a specification of 
pedagogical roles, goals, materials, activities, outcomes, and 
various dependencies that might affect the sequence, structure or 
content of the learning experience. The script can be seen as 
specifying the structured interactions that occur between learners 
and any materials or environments, and with peers and teachers. 
These interactions would typically be “scaffolded” [7] to support 
constructivist learning and productive exchange or discourse [19]. 
Enactment of the script – in classrooms, museums, at home, in the 
field, or any combination or settings – has been referred to as a 
process of orchestration [3, 5], where the teacher, technology, 

materials, and even the physical classroom (walls, furniture) play a 
role in coordinating conditions and activities of the script.  

Technological environments can provide orchestration support for 
the coordination of materials, tools, environments and structured 
interactions.  Moving beyond the realm of computer-based learning 
environments such as WISE [14], or Quest Atlantis [1] 
investigators are now incorporating new forms of interactions that 
include ubiquitous computing embedded within furniture [2,10], 
walls [8, 9, 11], and even floors [4, 6]. Our group has developed an 
infrastructure for smart classrooms called the Scalable Architecture 
for Interactive Learning (SAIL) that employs learning analytic 
techniques to allow students’ physical interactions and spatial 
positioning within the room to play a strong role in scripting and 
orchestration. Using intelligent agents and real time data mining, 
the room can be given an “awareness” of its occupants: who is in 
the room, what activities or conditions they are assigned to, what 
tasks have been completed, and even “student models” that are 
dynamically constructed and queried. 

At present, SAIL includes: (1) a student management layer, (2) a 
content management system for the storage and retrieval of student 
work, (3) a messaging server architecture for connecting devices 
and software in real-time, (4) a visualization layer that displays 
aggregated student work and materials, and (5) an intelligent 
software agent architecture that can aid the complex distribution of 
materials, tracking and movement of students, and prompting of 
teachers based on predefined criteria or factors emerging from 
student interactions.  See Figure. 

Sections below describe two recent KCI designs, each consisting of 
a complex “script” that was co-designed and orchestrated by the 
teacher, with scaffolding from a SAIL-based smart classroom. For 
each of the two examples, we focus on two elements that are 
important to learning analytics: (1) our use of symbolic 
representations of the design (2) the role of the technology 
environment in orchestration (including ambient displays, spatial 
features, and data mining). 

4. EVOROOM: IMMERSIVE SIMULATION 
FOR COLLECTIVE INQUIRY IN BIOLOGY 
EvoRoom is a room-sized simulation of a rainforest environment 
designed for a smart classroom in a high school biology curriculum 
in topics of biodiversity and evolution. The immersive experience, 
in which our smart classroom was transformed through large-wall 

 
Figure 1:  SAIL Architecture 

271



projections into a dynamic, interactive rainforest, was designed as 
part of a two-month KCI curriculum enacted by the teacher [8]. 
Within the room, students are engaged in collaborative inquiry, 
taking on the role of “field researchers” making observations of the 
simulations via their tablet computers. The rainforest itself was 
dynamic, rendered in Flash, with animated flora and fauna.  The 
rainforest also evolved through 200 million years, with distinct 
versions of background, flora and fauna developed for 9 different 
time increments. Students observed assigned species over time, 
working in groups to make connections between different species. 
Collectively, students determined how various mechanisms of 
evolution were involved in shaping present day biodiversity [8]. 

4.1 Emergent Aggregate Representation   
A central challenge to our research is as follows: given a roomful 
of students who are immersed in such an environment, how can 
they be engaged collectively in a constructive learning experience? 
How can their interactions with the media (e.g., comparing the 
simulations of 150 MYA with those of 100 MYA) be aggregated 
across all student observations to reveal important patterns that lead 
to insight about complex biology topics such as natural selection, 
genetic drift or sexual selection? We came up with the idea of a 
real-time, emergent cladogram: a representation common to 
evolutionary biology that shows the species’ descendancy relations 
over time.  Typically, these diagrams start off quite simple, with 
species “radiating” as time moves forward.   

We engaged students, via their tablet computers, in making discrete 
observations of whether certain species were present at various 
times, and – if not – which species that actually was present might 
be their assigned species’ predecessor.  Over one session, students 
created a total of 157 such relationships. This would have been 
unwieldy without real time data analytics which created a running 
assembly of a cladogram, resulting in a kind of social ”puzzle” (a 
form of “playification” that engaged students in completing the 
whole picture – see Figure: Evoroom).  The result was an activity 
where students felt they were engaged meaningfully as a 
community within the environment, creating an aggregate 
representation that the teacher was able to use for purposes of a 
concluding discussion about evolutionary processes. 
 

4.2 Technology scaffolds for orchestration 
Once students entered the EvoRoom simulation, all student 
experience was orchestrated by the teacher and facilitated S3 
technology. Because the students had been engaged in related 
activities throughout the broader curriculum design (e.g., 
researching a “specialization” species), they entered not as 
complete novices to the rainforest, but with some knowledge and 
specific expertise. We designed the experience to build on their 
prior expertise, using intelligent agents to assign students to 
different regions of the room and observation tasks. Their personal 
tablet gave them instructions of where to go and what to observe. 
To confirm that students were at the assigned location within the 
room, we employed two-dimensional “QR” codes, which students 
were prompted to photograph with their tablets. The teacher was 
able to coordinate the discussion by referring to the aggregate 
representations at the front of the room.  

We developed an Instructor’s tablet that allowed the teacher to 
control all student tablets in the room and to “advance the room” 
through various evolutionary time periods. Intelligent agents 
tracked students’ real-time activities, sending the data to a central 
database that housed curriculum materials and the products of 
student interactions. As part of the activity, a “sorting agent” 
assigned students different organisms to look for. When students 
scanned QR codes at the different stations, the agents recognized 
their location and sent further, contextualized instruction to the 
tablets. The simulation files were also a part of this network and 
were controlled with a custom tablet application, allowing the 
teacher to manage the time spent in each portion of the activity, 
controlling the pedagogical flow within the room. 

4.3 Ambient Feedback 
Two Smartboards at the front of the room provided ambient 
feedback as students progressed through the activity. Observations 
captured on students’ tablet computers were aggregated and 
displayed for each step of the activity. For example, as students 
noted their assigned species’ potential ancestors at different time 
periods, everyone’s answers were placed in the interactive 
cladogram - allowing teacher and student manipulation and serving 
a locus of discussions. 

 
Figure 2: Evoroom. Large screen projections around the room (above) display the immersive 
simulation, together with audio tracks of natural rainforest sounds, transform a smart classroom into a 
rainforest in Southeast Asia.  Students are engaged collectively, collaboratively and individually in a 
series of carefully scripted activities, such as to make observations of whether individual species are 
present in the environment.  This results in a dynamic aggregated representation (right) of an emergent 
cladogram that guides student activity and leads to productive discussions. The cladogram shows 
species’ evolutionary relationships emerging over time, from bottom to top, with color coded boxes 
representing plants, animals and insects. Real time data mining of student contributions was employed, 
with each student observation interpreted by an intelligent agent (via subscription to an XMPP 
messaging channel), then “handled” by integrating it into the structured representation. 

272



5. PHYSICS LEARNING ACROSS 
CONTEXTS & ENVIRONMENTS (PLACE) 
This project infused a traditional high school physics course with a 
persistent “knowledge base” that captured students’ social tags and 
reflections about homework problems, as well as their own 
contributions of everyday phenomena (i.e., photos and videos) and 
constructed problems [21]. Students engaged in carefully scripted 
activities during three physics units on force, motion, and energy, 
producing a dynamic, filterable web of relevant content, indexed to 
the 13 major principles of the course units. For example, students 
regularly answered multi-choice qualitative problems as 
homework, “tagging” them in terms of the relevant principles, and 
adding reflections. The teacher used this information (patterns of 
student replies, as well as reflections) to lead productive 
discussions in class. Students were also required to add physics 
examples into the web (i.e., found on the Internet or photographed 
in their everyday lives), tagging them to the relevant physics 
principles, and to review, discuss, and refine the contribution of 
their peers. The resulting web provided a rich array of physics 
connections across principles, illustrating the coherent nature of the 
domain, and providing a dynamic resource for further inquiry. 

5.1 Aggregate Representations 
As the PLACE Web matured (i.e., gained content and social 
information) it provided a resource for subsequent student inquiry, 
including a smart classroom activity where students applied the 
various problems, principles, reflections and equations from their 
web to collectively analyze selected Hollywood movie clips. Their 
objective was to decide whether or not the clip violated the laws of 
physics, and how the clip could be “set up” as a physics problem. 
This served as a culminating activity, engaging students with the 
principles in new ways, with an embodied aspect of physically 
moving ideas and people around the room.  

Intelligent agents conducted real time data mining as students 
constructed aggregate representations of their emerging solutions to 
the ill-defined problems. For example, students were asked to “tag” 
the Hollywood clip with equations, drawn from physics problems 
that they had seen during previous weeks.  At first, all equations 
tagged by students were shown on the screen (using XMPP 
messaging/agents that allowed students to “send” the equations 

from their tablets onto the shared display). Those problems were 
provided to students by agents – doing a real time query of the 
PLACE.Web knowledge base to find problems that had been 
tagged with the same principles as those applied to the video clips. 
On observing this aggregate display of equations, students were 
scaffolded to form a “consensus” about which equations would be 
their final set to be passed on to the next group who would use 
them to try to set up the problem.  These forms of dynamic shared 
displays were developed for several stages of the step-wise problem 
solving process, allowing students to become familiar with the 
emergent representation and consensus process. 

5.2 Technology scaffolds for orchestration 
As with the EvoRoom project, the S3 technology helped the teacher 
to orchestrate our PLACE curriculum design, reducing his load to 
one of responding to patterns he observed or requests made by 
students. We improved upon the orchestrational technology used in 
EvoRoom, developing a teacher tablet to show real-time updates of 
all student groups and broker the flow of activities in the room, 
(i.e., requiring a teacher action on the tablet before a group could 
progress to the next step) [20]. Intelligent agents also played a more 
sophisticated role in PLACE, performing pedagogical operations 
such as grouping students according to their choices made in the 
immediately preceding activity or supplying students with physics 
problems that they had rated differently from others.  

A set of intelligent agents orchestrated the flow of materials and 
students in the smartroom. The agents responded to emergent 
patterns in the data, making orchestration decisions “on-the-fly,” 
and providing teachers and students with timely information. Three 
agents are of relevance to our analysis of orchestration: (1) The 
Sorting Agent sorted students into groups and assigned room 
locations. The sorting was based on patterns that only emerged 
during enactment. For example, students were sorted into groups 
for Step two based on their tagging choices at made during Step 
one. (2) The Consensus Agent requiring consensus to be achieved 
among group members before they could progress to the next step; 
(3) The Bucket Agent coordinated the distribution of materials, 
providing one item at a time until the “bucket” was empty.  

5.3 Ambient Feedback 
A large Smartboard screen at the front of the room (i.e., not one of 
the 4 Hollywood video stations) provided a persistent, passive 
representation of the state of individual, small group, and whole 
class progression through each step of the smart classroom activity. 

 
Figure: PLACE.Web.  Students work collaboratively and 
collectively in the smart classroom to set up and solve ill-
defined Hollywood physics problems. 

 
Figure: Ambient Display. A large projected display at the fornt 
of the room helped in orchestration of complex activities. 

273



A large projected display dynamically updated student location 
assignments within the room, and tracked the timing of each 
activity, using three color codes (a large color band around the 
whole board that reflected how much time was remaining: “green” 
(plenty of time remaining), “yellow” (try to finish up soon), and 
“red” (you should be finished now). The ambient display provided 
feedback to students and teacher alike, ensuring timely enactment 
of the script, which involved assignments of students to four 
different stations, in a complex sequence, all in a 70 minute period. 

6. Conclusion  
Over the past several years, our research group has advanced our 
technology framework, in pursuit of a means to coordinate complex 
collaborative inquiry designs that are not fully specified at their 
outset [13].  That is, they depend upon aspects of the student 
contributions or interactions, which determine sequences, grouping, 
or distribution of material.  In recent years, many of our designs 
have centered on a collective construction, whether it be a wiki, or 
aggregate representation that emerges in real time. We have begun 
to develop symbolic representations that formalize such 
dependencies, not necessarily with the aim of achieving “machine 
readable designs” (although such would not be out of the question) 
but rather to support the discourse of science, in our own design 
process and in sharing those designs in our publications.  Too long 
constrained by the absence of such formalism, we are now 
progressing toward a pedagogical logic that, when accompanied by 
intelligent agents and smart classroom infrastructure, could allow 
the investigation a wide range of inquiry designs and interaction 
paradigms. 

7. References 
[1] Barab, S, A., & Dede, C. 2007. Games and immersive 

participatory simulations for science education: An emerging 
type of curricula. Journal of Science Education and 
Technology, 16(1), 1-3. 

[2] Dillenbourg, P., Huang, J., & Cherubini, M. 2008. Interactive 
artifacts and furniture supporting collaborative work and 
learning. Springer Verlag. 

[3] Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. 2007. Designing Integrative 
Scripts. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl & J. M. Haake 
(Eds.), Scripting Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 
(Vol. 6, 275–301). Boston, MA: Springer. 

[4] Johnson–Glenberg, M., Birchfield, D., Koziupa, T., Savio-
Ramos,C. & Cruse, J. 2012. Seeing It versus Doing It: Lessons 
from Mixed Reality STEM Education. In Abrahamson, D. 
(Chair), You’re It! Body, Action, and Object in STEM 
Learning. Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of 
the Learning Sciences (ICLS) - Volume 2, (pp. 99-109). ISLS.  

[5] Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. 2007. Internal and 
external scripts in computer-supported collaborative inquiry 
learning. Learning & Instruction, 17(6), 708-721. 

[6] Lindgren, R., Aakre, A., & Moshell, J. M. 2012. You’re the 
Asteroid! Body-Based Metaphors in a Mixed Reality 
Simulation of Planetary Astronomy. In Abrahamson, D. 
(Chair), You’re It! Body, Action, and Object in STEM 
Learning. Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of 
the Learning Sciences (ICLS) - Volume 2, (pp. 99-109). ISLS.  

[7] Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B.-S. 2006. Science education: 
Integrating views of learning and instruction. In P. A. 
Alexander, & P. H. Winne (Eds.), Handbook of educational 
psychology (pp. 511–544). Mahwah, NJ: LEA 

[8] Lui, M., & Slotta, J. D. 2012. Designing Immersive 
Environments for Collective Inquiry. Proceedings of the 10th 

International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 
2012) - Volume 2 (pp. 12-14). ISLS. 

[9] Lui, M., Tissenbaum, M., & Slotta, J. D. 2011. Scripting 
collaborative learning in smart classrooms: Towards building 
knowledge communities. Proceedings of the 9th International 
Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 
(CSCL) – Volume 1, (pp. 430-437). ISLS. 

[10] Mercier, E., McNaughton, J., Higgins, S. & Burd, E. 2012, 
Orchestrating Learning in the Multi-touch Classroom: 
Developing Appropriate Tools, in van Aalst, J., et al., eds, 
Short Papers, Symposia and Abstracts 2: The Future of 
Learning: 10th International Conference of the Learning 
Sciences (ICLS 2012). 

[11] Moher, T. 2008. Learning and participation in a persistent 
whole-classroom seismology simulation. Proceedings 
International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 
2008), Vol. 2 (Utrecht, Netherlands, June 2008), 82-90.  

[12] Roschelle, J. & Penuel, W.R. 2006. Co-Design of Innovations 
with Teachers: Definition and Dynamics. Proceedings of the 
7th International Conference on Learning Sciences, 
Bloomington, IN, pp. 606-612. 

[13] Slotta, J. D. 2010. Evolving the classrooms of the future: The 
interplay of pedagogy, technology and community. In K. 
Mäkitalo-Siegl, F. Kaplan, J. Zottmann & F. Fischer (Eds.). 
Classroom of the Future. Orchestrating collaborative spaces. 
(215-242). Rotterdam: Sense. 

[14] Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. 2009. WISE Science: Web-based 
Inquiry in the Classroom. New York: Teachers College Press. 

[15] Slotta J. D. and Najafi H. 2010, Knowledge Communities in 
the Classroom. In: P. Peterson, E. Baker, B. McGaw, (Eds.), 
International Encyclopedia of Education. volume 8, pp. 189-
196. Oxford: Elsevier.  

[16] Slotta, J. D., & Najafi, H. 2012.  Knowledge Community and 
Inquiry ? Wiki?based collaboration in a high school science 
course as a knowledge community.  In N. Lavigne, (Ed.), 
Emerging Technologies for the Classroom:  A Learning 
Sciences Perspective. Pp. 93-112.  New York. Springer 

[17] Slotta, J. D., & Peters, V. L. 2008. A blended model for 
knowledge communities: Embedding scaffolded inquiry. 
International Perspectives in the Learning Sciences: Cre8ing a 
learning world. Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference for the Learning Sciences (pp. 343-350). ISLS. 

[18] Slotta, J. D., Tissenbaum, M. & Lui, M. 2011. SAIL Smart 
Space: Orchestrating Collective Inquiry for Knowledge 
Communities. Proceedings of the 9th International Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning Conference, Hong Kong. 
Vol 3, pp. 1082-1083.  

[19] Slotta, J.D., Tissenbaum, M., Lui, M., & Zukowski, M.  2012. 
Smart Classrooms for Knowledge Communities: EPIC 
Technology Environment.  Proceedings of the 10th  
International Conference of the Learning Sciences - Volume 2: 
64-71. ISLS. 

[20] Tissenbaum, M., Lui, M. & Slotta, J.D. 2012. Smart 
Classrooms for Knowledge Communities: Learning Across 
Contexts in Secondary Science. Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the American Educational Research Association 
(AERA), Vancouver, BC. 

[21] Tissenbaum, M., Lui, M., & Slotta, J.D. 2011. Orchestrating 
Collaborative Science Curriculum Across Formal and 
Informal Contexts. Proceedings of the 9th International 
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning Conference, 
Hong Kong. Vol 3, pp 1143-114

274





