
Exploring the interplay between human and machine

annotated multimodal learning analytics in hands-on

STEM Activities

Daniel Spikol

Malmö University

Malmö, Sweden

daniel.spikol@mah.se

Katerina Avramides

UCL Institute of Education

London, UK

K.Avramides@ioe.ac.uk

Mutlu Cukurova

UCL Institute of Education

London, UK

m.cukurova@ioe.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
This poster explores how to develop a working framework for
STEM education that uses both human annotated and ma-
chine data across a purpose-built learning environment. Our
dual approach is to develop a robust framework for analysis
and investigate how to design a learning analytics system to
support hands-on engineering design tasks. Data from the
first user tests are presented along with the framework for
discussion.

Keywords
Mobile, Learning Analytics, CSCL

1. INTRODUCTION
There is concern amongst policy makers and employers

that students are not graduating with the required skills
in STEM subjects (Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics). It is argued that learners must go beyond the
acquisition of discipline-specific facts and skills, to develop
an integrated understanding of STEM disciplines within an
authentic context of collaborative problem-solving. This in-
tegrated approach to STEM teaching is at the heart of in-
structional practices that centre on collaborative, hands-on,
engineering design problems [4]. The use of hands-on engi-
neering design problems, in classroom teaching, is facilitated
by physical computing kits, such as the Arduino1, and other
platforms. These kits provide building blocks that make
technology development more accessible to novices, thus al-
lowing them to work on more complex problems. A fine-
grained analysis of the collaborative problem-solving pro-
cess, using learning analytics tools, can provide insight into
learning to support both teachers and learners. However, it
is hard to track and interpret learner activity in engineer-
ing design problems, due to the hands-on and open-ended
nature of such tasks [3]. This poster presents work that be-

1www.arduino.cc

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
LAK16 April, 25-29, 2016, Endinburgh, UK
c? 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).

ACM ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.475/123 4

gins to address this challenge. We discuss the development
of a coding process for exploring hands-on STEM activi-
ties, using physical computing kits, that uses both hand-
annotated and machine data across a purpose-built learning
environment. The research aim is to investigate how we can
support a combination of realtime hand-annotated data col-
lected with machine collected data to help understand the
complexities of collaborative problem solving.

2. BACKGROUND
This work is part of the PELARS project2, which explores

teaching and learning of STEM using physical computing
kits and open-ended engineering design tasks. The aim of
PELARS is to develop learning analytics tools that support
teachers and students. There is limited research on learn-
ing analytics within this context, due to the di?culty of
tracking and interpreting student activity [3]. Researchers,
in this area, have primarily focused on using learning an-
alytics tools to gain a more fine-grained understanding of
patterns of problem-solving between novices and experts,
generally with a strong focus on individual rather than col-
laborative learning [1][3]. However, collaborative learning
has a central role in formal education. There is a wealth
of research that suggests collaboration, compared with indi-
vidual work, can foster better problem-solving and greater
learning outcomes [2]. Collaboration supports learners to ar-
ticulate their thinking and listen to others, as well as resolve
conflicts and build on new ideas. Therefore, opportunities
for new research that combine multimodal learning analytics
with hands-on collaborative learning are present for further
investigation.

3. TOOLS AND SETTINGS
The tools described in the poster consist of a purpose-built

learning environment with multiple sensors to collect data
during practice-based activities, with added web and mo-
bile tools for learners to document their learning activities.
The learning environment is a designed workshop that in-
cludes a specially designed table connected to a freestanding
wall with a built-in display. This special work area accom-
modates a small group up to 4 students. The workstation
includes a computer vision system with facial and object
tracking (fiducial marks), log files from the programming of
physical computing kits, as well as tracking of the di?erent
physical components that are being used by the students.

2www.pelars-project.eu

http://dx.doi.org/10.475/123_4


Table 1: Breakdown of data collection

Data Collection Types of Data Coding
Computer Vision Arm Tracking, Audio Levels, Motion, Objets Machine
Visual Electronics Platform Components connected and coding actions Machine
Sentiment Buttons Frequency A?ective states Machine
Mobile System Research coding, learner documentation Machine and Human

Audio levels are captured (in the current release), and we
have created two large buttons that students can push to
signify sentiment (thunder cloud and sun). These buttons
trigger the system to capture a screenshot of the program-
ming activity and photo of the action on the table. Stu-
dents need to plan, document, and reflect on their solution
by entering brief text descriptions and capture photographs
and video through the mobile system. More interestingly
(for this poster) the mobile system provides a tool for re-
search observations to be marked (in a temporal sense) ”on
the fly”, providing a bridge between the data that the sys-
tem collects. Table 1 illustrates the di?erent type of data
collected, what sensors, and the split between machine and
human data collection and coding. The annotation data cre-
ated by the researchers and the learners serves as a coarse
temporal breakdown of the activities. These web-based mo-
bile tools (cross platform) also provide a key tool for re-
searchers to provide course realtime encoding based on an
analysis framework for collaborative work. It is our intention
to explore how this rougher coding done by researchers and
learners could supply more automatic segmentation between
the di?erent design activities, thus structuring the machine
collected data.

Figure 1: Detail of initial visualisation based real-

time coding

4. DATA COLLECTION
As of writing this poster, the project has conducted its

first full test of the system with two groups of three stu-
dents with mixed backgrounds. The user trial procedure
was to set up the test and introduce the students to the
system. Each of the students wore fiducial tags for the vi-
sion system on their dominant arm and were shown how
to use the mobile reporting system. Then the students were
guided with an hands-on introduction to the visual program-
ming platform (IDE) that included working with sensors and
actuator blocks and programming them. The task of proto-
typing an interactive toy in 30 minutes was introduced and

the learning analytics system started. The research observer
using the mobile device began the coding of the activity with
marking events (design stages of project scoping, project re-
alisation, and reflection) while the students used the tool to
capture planning, documenting, and reflecting. Figure 1 vi-
sualises the breakdown of planning, building, and reflecting
across the di?erent data that generated by the combination
of research observations and the students input. Our initial
work with the data has been to generate a rough visualisa-
tion as a first attempt to reflect on the data. We present
the sum of all learners hand movements and the gaze at the
display. We also include the number of times students in-
teracted with the electronics and the IDE. We generated a
simple timeline diagram divided into 3 phases illustrating
the duration of these high-frequency events in the di?erent
phases.

5. DISCUSSION
The ability to use both the researcher codes of the di?er-

ent design stages [1][3] and the students own classification of
their activities suggests a rapid way to break down the data
collected into appropriate parts for analysis and visualisa-
tion. Of course, questions and work remain to test further
this process of using multimodal data and encoded annota-
tions in comparison to more traditional hand coding of the
video analysis in the project.

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The PELARS Project has received funding from the European

Commission’s Seventh Framework Programme for research, tech-

nological development and demonstration under grant agreement

no. 619738.

7. ADDITIONAL AUTHORS
Bahtijar Vogel (Malmo? University bahtijar.vogel@mah.se), Rose

Luckin (UCL IOE, R.Luckin@ioe.ac.uk), Emanuele Ru?aldi (Scuola
Superiore Sant’Anna, e.ruffaldi@sssup.it) and Mavrikis, Manolis
(UCL IOE, jm.mavrikis@ucl.ac.uk).

References
[1] C. J. Atman, R. S. Adams, M. E. Cardella, J. Turns, S. Mos-

borg, and J. Saleem. Engineering Design Processes: A Com-

parison of Students and Expert Practitioners. Journal of En-

gineering Education, 96(4):359–379, Jan. 2013.

[2] B. Barron. Achieving coordination in collaborative problem-

solving groups. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,

9(4):403–436, 2000.

[3] M. Worsley and P. Blikstein. Analyzing Engineering Design

through the Lens of Computation. Journal of Learning Ana-

lytics, 1(2):151–186, Aug. 2014.

[4] D. L. Zeidler. Dancing with maggots and saints: Visions for

subject matter knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, and peda-

gogical content knowledge in science teacher education reform.

Journal of Science Teacher Education, 13(1):27–42, 2002.


	Introduction
	Background
	Tools and Settings
	Data Collection
	Discussion
	Acknowledgments
	Additional Authors


