The Dutch xAPI Experience  Alan Berg Universiteit van Amsterdam  Weesperzijde 190 1097 DZ Amsterdam,  The Netherlands a.m.berg@uva.nl  Maren Scheffel Open Universiteit  Valkenburgerweg 177 6419 AT Heerlen, The Netherlands  maren.scheffel@ou.nl  Hendrik Drachsler Open Universiteit  Valkenburgerweg 177 6419 AT Heerlen, The Netherlands  hendrik.drachsler@ou.nl Stefaan Ternier Open Universiteit  Valkenburgerweg 177 6419 AT Heerlen, The Netherlands  stefaan.ternier@ou.nl  Marcus Specht Open Universiteit  Valkenburgerweg 177 6419 AT Heerlen, The Netherlands  marcus.specht@ou.nl  ABSTRACT We present the collected experiences since 2012 of the Dutch Special Interest Group (SIG) for Learning Analytics in the application of the xAPI standard. We have been experi- menting and exchanging best practices around the appli- cation of xAPI in various contexts. The practices include dierent design patterns centered around Learning Record Stores. We present three projects that apply xAPI in very dierent ways and publish a consistent set of xAPI recipes.  CCS Concepts Information systems ! Data management systems; Information storage systems; Information systems  applications; Applied computing ! Education;  Keywords learning analytics, xAPI, learning record store, data stan- dardization, data silos  1. INTRODUCTION We introduce briefly three xAPI-powered learning ana-  lytics research projects that are supported by members of the SURF SIG on Learning Analytics. These projects are UvAInform, ECO and Learning Pulse. We describe the main benefits and disadvantages of xAPI and address why it is important to provide an authoritative set of recipes. Finally, we publish the recipes used within our projects to support consistent application.  The Experience API (xAPI) formerly known as TinCan API was publicly launched in April 2012. The standard is stable, there have been no significant updates to the spec-  Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). LAK 16 April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883968  ification since 2014 and it is increasingly being adopted1. Since 2014 we have seen numerous projects and initiatives in Europe that apply the xAPI specification as a metadata approach to securely aggregate learning events ready for di- gestion by Learning Record Stores and analytics engines. A bandwagon of xAPI showcases and systems is starting to roll in Europe as an increasing number of educational insti- tutions harvest structured and consistent data. A motivator for this is that xAPI delivers three very innovative aspects that are appealing to digital education providers in the 21st century: The xAPI approach is (1) learner activity centered, (2) system independent, and (3) straightforward to imple- ment.  2. EUROPEAN XAPI PROJECTS In 2012, the first project that applied the xAPI approach  was UvAInform at the University of Amsterdam (UvA). The second was the European project ECO. This project has played a central role by developing a complete set of xAPI statements for all activities a learner can interact with within a traditional MOOC or other distance education courses. We finish the overview with the LACE Learning Pulse study that applies xAPI methodology to biofeedback data from wearable devices. The last two projects are both running at the Open University of the Netherlands (OUNL).  In June 2012 UvA initiated a stimulus project for learning analytics known as the UvAInform project. The project in- cluded seven pilots mostly centered on dashboard building and a generic infrastructure component, a UvA-developed LRS named Larissa2. From 2012 to 2014, the central ser- vices of UvA invested in instrumenting open source xAPI connectors for Sakai3 to accelerate and experiment with the use of learning activity data and the Apereo Open Academic Environment (OAE)4. The aim was to generate wider adop- tion by researchers. Researcher involvement was seen as a key factor in understanding and developing learning analytic services and was driven by two contradictory perceptions by  1https://github.com/adlnet/xAPI-Spec 2https://github.com/Apereo-Learning-Analytics- Initiative/Larissa 3https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/TINCAN/Home 4http://oaeproject.org    decision makers: (1) learning analytics had the potential to improve services across a spectrum of stakeholders and (2) the lack of hard evidence in 2012 for the impact on learning analytics within the Dutch context.  In early 2014, OUNL received European funding to de- velop a learning analytics infrastructure for the ECO project5. ECO is developing a single entry portal for various MOOC providers. It contributes to increasing awareness of the ad- vantages of open online education in Europe and to develop shared technologies for the dierent MOOC providers [1]. The ECO project comprises a set of learning platforms that already have their own logging and monitoring system. Each platform can use its proprietary methodology as long as it also provides the required data according to the xAPI spec- ification. Therefore, an LRS architecture with xAPI state- ments has been established that allows the calculation of learning analytics indicators for each involved platform.  Within another European project called LACE6, OUNL and their partners collect and visualize evidences to support learning analytics best practices for K12, workplace learn- ing, and the higher education sector in Europe among other objectives. Within the LACE project, OUNL conducts ex- perimental studies focused on educational evaluation of ad- vanced analytics tools [5]. Among mobile learning analytics they are working with BioFeedback and environmental data to identify conditions for productive and unproductive learn- ing contexts. The Learning Pulse study stores data from four dierent sources such as (1) RescueTime7, a tracking tool that analyzes the tools used on a PC and applies a pro- ductivity score, (2) the heart rate of the learners measured through wearable FitBit8 devices, (3) weather data through open data weather services and, (4) user ratings about their own past activities.  3. TOWARDS XAPI CONSISTENCY The most challenging issue for xAPI is the freedom of  choice when designing xAPI statements. Anyone can on de- mand define statements and related vocabulary. This will work for an isolated solution, however, this approach gener- ates considerable issues once the barriers between data silos are broken down and xAPI datasets are combined. The interoperability issue is not a new one and has been de- scribed long before the xAPI approach for other standards such as IMS LD [3] and SCORM [4]. Nevertheless, the call for a more standardized approach to collecting data that increases the insights one gains from standardized data is still valid and becomes even more urgent with the learner activity-based data collection.  Several contemporary sources of xAPI recipes exist, the primary library is advertised on the ADLnet website9. How- ever, as of October 2015, the documented recipes are limited in extent to a number of contexts (attendance, bookmarklet, checklist, open badges, scorm to tincan, tags, video, virtual patient activities). A secondary set of recipes that expand coverage to initially support cMOOCs [2] are stored in a Github location10. Although these sources are suggestive  5https://ecolearning.eu 6http://www.laceproject.eu 7https://www.rescuetime.com 8https://www.fitbit.com 9http://tincanapi.com/recipes/  10https://github.com/kirstykitto/CLRecipe  and act as sources of guidance there is currently no clearly authoritative of one source of truth. The lack of authorita- tive guidance in selecting verbs and others metadata terms generates a huge inconsistency between single statements be- tween providers. For instance, interaction of a learner with a video could be tracked as: Learner A played the movie How to cook good xAPI versus Learner B watched the video How to cook good xAPI. Both statements express the same experience in slightly dierent semantic manners. There- fore, xAPI promotes the use of recipes to standardize the expression of experiences, because there are multiple plau- sible paths to defining that a learner has interacted with an object. xAPI thus relies on the educational community to publicize and deliver standards for these recipes.  UvAInform, ECO and LACEs Learning Pulse have cov- ered a wide range of learner interactions. All three have thus published their underlying xAPI statements. These recipes can be found in a publicly shared Google document. The overview of xAPI statements is available in two ways: (1) a registry of the complete statements in JSON format11  and (2) a spreadsheet with the most important information needed for each statement12, i.e., a more user-friendly and readable version of the same content. It describes the activ- ity, names the specific action and lists the verbs and types of objects to be used. For each statement it also provides a link to the respective JSON statement in the registry document. These recipes, if incorporated into a defacto standard, will significantly increase the range of recipes and thus support recipe standardization as it is the authors great wish to be part of an orchestrated process that delivers one authorita- tive source of xAPI recipes.  4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The eorts of M. Scheel, H. Drachsler and S. Ternier have  partly been funded by the ECO project (grant no. 21127) and the LACE project (grant no. 619424).  5. REFERENCES [1] F. Brouns, J. Mota, L. Morgado, D. Jansen, S. Fano,  A. Silva, and A. Teixeira. A networked learning framework for eective mooc design: the eco project approach. In Proc. 8th EDEN Research Workshop, pages 161171, Budapest, Hungary, 2014. EDEN.  [2] K. Kitto, S. Cross, Z. Waters, and M. Lupton. Learning analytics beyond the lms: The connected learning analytics toolkit. In Proc. of the Fifth Int. Conf. on Learning Analytics And Knowledge, LAK15, pages 1115, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.  [3] R. Koper and B. Olivier. Representing the learning design of units of learning. Educational Technology & Society,, 7(3):97111, 2004.  [4] C. Qu and W. Nejdl. Towards interoperability and reusability of learning resource: a scorm-conformant courseware for computer science education. In Proc. of the 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. on Advanced Learning Technologies (IEEE ICALT 2002), 2002.  [5] B. Tabuenca, M. Kalz, H. Drachsler, and M. Specht. Time will tell: The role of mobile learning analytics in self-regulated learning. Journal of Computers & Education,, 89:5374, 2015.  11http://bit.ly/DutchXAPIreg 12http://bit.ly/DutchXAPIspread    