Smart Environments and Analytics on Video-Based Learning  Michail N. Giannakos  Norwegian University of  Science and Technology   Trondheim, Norway  michailg@idi.ntnu.no   Demetrios G. Sampson  Curtin University  Perth, Australia   demetrios.sampson@curt in.edu.au   ukasz Kidziski  Ecole Polytechnique   Fdrale de Lausanne,  Lausanne, Switzerland   lukasz.kidzinski@epfl.ch   Abelardo Pardo  The University of Sydney   Sydney, Australia  abelardo.pardo@sydn  ey.edu.au     ABSTRACT  The International Workshop of Smart Environments and  Analytics on Video-Based Learning (SE@VBL) aims to connect  research efforts on Video-Based Learning with Smart  Environments and Analytics to create synergies between these  fields. The main objective is to build a research community  around the intersection of these topical areas. In particular,  SE@VBL aims to develop a critical discussion about the next  generation of video-based learning environments and their  analytics, the form of these analytics and the way they can be  analyzed in order to help us to better understand and improve the  value of educational videos to support teaching and learning.  SE@VBL is based on the rationale that combining and analyzing  learners' interactions with other available data obtained from  learners, new avenues for research on video-based learning have  emerged. This can have a significant impact in current educational  trends such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) and  Flipped Classroom.   Categories and Subject Descriptors  K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education] Computer-assisted  instruction (CAI), Distance learning; J.1 [Administrative Data  Processing] Education   General Terms  Measurement, Design, Experimentation, Human Factors,   Keywords  Video-Based Learning, Learning Analytics, Smart Environments,  Visual Analytics, Interaction Design.   1. BACKGROUND  With the widespread adoption of video-based learning systems  such as Khan Academy and edX, new research in the area of  Learning Analytics and Smart Learning Environments has  emerged. Even new for-profit companies, such as Coursera and  Udacity, have started offering forms of instruction that are  primarily video-based. Most universities are implementing video  lectures in a variety of ways, such as delivering lecture recordings  before class to conserve class time or to flip the day for hands-on  activities. Video-based learning environments (such as Massive  Open Online Courses MOOCs) are becoming widely popular,   sometimes with unjustified promises. Yet, the educational added- value of video-based learning environments, is lacking strong  evidences, as learners do not always use them as expected and in  an effective way [1].   As a step toward improving learners experience and engagement  with video-based learning systems; students activity might be  converted via analytics into useful information and benefit smart  environments efficiency and ultimately learners experience and  performance. Capturing, sharing and analyzing these learners  interactions can clearly provide scholars and educators with  valuable information [2]. In addition, the combination of other  information of the individual learner and/or groups of learners can  provide opportunities for adding value to learning analytics and  smart video environments.   To explore the future of video-based technologies for teaching  and learning, we aim to build a research community around this  topical area, to brainstorm about what the next generation of  video-based learning environments might look like, what kind of  data can be collected, and how these data can help us to better  understand and improve the value of video-based learning.   2. OBJECTIVES  The advances of technology-supported open access to education  indicate an increased use of video but only when pedagogically  appropriate and designed purposely to facilitate teaching and  learning. From current research, it is difficult to tell what aspects  of the video-lectures and video-based learning systems can have a  positive impact. In order to employ videos that serve as powerful  pedagogical tools, care should be taken to examine their impact  on the overall learner experience. As such, the purpose of this  workshop is to explore how smart environments and analytics can  improve video-systems learning potential.   In particular, we seek to answer the following two questions:   RQ1. How smart environments and analytics can  improve video-based learning experience, adoption and  learning outcome   RQ2. How video based learning environments can be  better developed for taking full advantage of the  opportunities and challenges they provide   One of our main objectives is to bring together researchers who  are interested on Smart Environments, Learning Analytics and  their application on Video-based Learning. Specifically,  SE@VBL aims to provide an environment where participants will  get opportunities to: develop their research skills; increase their  knowledge base; collaborate with others in their own and  complementary research areas; and discuss their own work. In  particular, guiding questions and themes include:   O1. What might next generation of smart environments  and analytics enhanced video learning tools look like   Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that  copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights  for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other  uses, contact the Owner/Author.   Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883898      O2. What kind of data can be collected from video- based learning environments    O3. How these data can help us to better understand and  improve the educational value of video-based learning   O4. How emerging data analyses techniques (e.g.,  machine learning) as well as data visualizations can help  us to provide reflection and insights to learner, teacher,  manager, researcher, etc   O5. How can the affordances of video-based learning  coupled with learning analytics and help instructors to  redesign their teaching materials and practices   3. LEVERAGING VIDEO INTERACTION  DATA  The phenomenon of MOOCs introduced irreversible changes to  education. Lecture videos, which constitute the main part of an  online course, allow us to analyze students interaction from a  different perspective at a large scale - unimaginable in educational  science few years ago. This analysis is beneficial for all MOOC  stakeholders: Practitioners, can design their classes in a more  engaging way, service providers can build platforms which, for  example, simplify access to the most demanded content, and  educational researchers can understand incentives of a student  participating in a lecture.    We gather large amounts of data in the form of log files, database  entries, cookies etc., distributed among MOOC providers, clouds  and personal devices of students. Although this provides us a  great opportunity to understand the learning processes, it also  poses new technological and research challenges, which can only  be addressed by joint efforts of data science and educational  communities.   Classical statistical frameworks are now often reassessed. On one  hand, the notion of statistical significance is blurred  the  detection of an effect is simpler and we are more likely to discover  small effects, irrelevant in practice. Conversely, recent  advancements in machine learning allow us to discover new types  of patterns in data, useful in practice but difficult to prove  formally.   The process of addressing research questions became more  complex and involves more technical expertise. Instead of the  classical path hypothesis"  "experiment design"  "testing,  we now often need to take additional, nontrivial step of an  adequate representation of the data, as presented in Figure 1.      Fig. 1. The flow of data-driven educational research is now  altered by information retrieval step, where we find an adequate  representation of a vast dataset.   It is clear that we have reached into a significant turning point, a  new era of educational research. Not only we significantly  improve the quality of global education but also we have the  capacity to answer questions which were not even addressable few  years ago.   4. CONCLUSIONS AND THE WAY  AHEAD  The roles of 1) analytics on helping individuals to make sense of  the learning procedures and the 2) smart environments on  providing feedback and diverse smart functionalities have  drawn the interest of many scholars and practitioners in the last  years. In particular, analytics have proven their ability to help us  to understand (make sense) many complex learning phenomena in  the past [3]. However, comparing with research on text and  discourse analytics, the research on video analytics is still on an  early stage. Video analytics have an enormous potential,  especially given what is currently happening around the explosion  of MOOCs. As most of the MOOCs are using videos as their  primary content delivery mechanism, research on MOOCs will  heavily influence video-based learning research. So we believe  that the topic of SE@VBL is very timely with great potential.  This potential will grow as MOOC platforms, like Coursera and  Edx make their data publicly available to the research community.   Although research on video based learning has been increased in  the last years [1], a number of questions remain unexplored  regarding the use and design of videos for learning. In particular,  little research has been conducted on the functionalities and the  characteristics of learning videos and video based learning  systems. Characteristics like quality of feedback, cognitive load,  engagement and tone of voice, pace, length , and segmentation  need to be examined in more detail in order to improve the  effectiveness of video as learning medium [1, 4].   With respect to the viewing patterns of learners, some interesting  preliminary work was noted [4] including when and where  students watch learning videos as well as how they view materials  (e.g., in small chunks). Future research can focus on a more  detailed analysis of viewing patterns and its impact on learning  outcomes. For example, students who skip or re-watch segment  may integrate less knowledge than students who view videos more  systematically. To this end, sophisticated video analytic systems  as well as smart video-based environments can be used and help  us to make sense and improve how students learn with the  assistance of videos.   5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  Our thanks to thank the Research Council of Norway for the  financial support (project number: 248523/H20).   6. REFERENCES  [1] Giannakos, M. N. Exploring the video-based learning   research: A review of the literature. British Journal of  Educational Technology, 44(6), 191-195 (2013)   [2] Giannakos, M. N. et al. (2013). Analytics on video-based  learning. In Proceedings of LAK, ACM Press, 283-284.   [3] Siemens. G. (2012). Learning analytics: envisioning a  research discipline and a domain of practice. In Proceedings  of LAK, ACM Press, 4-8.     [4] Guo, P. J., Kim, J., & Rubin, R. (2014). How video  production affects student engagement: An empirical study  of mooc videos. In Proceedings of Learning@ scale, 41-50.     