Learning analytics in practice  The effects of adaptive educational technology Snappet on   students arithmetic skills     Inge Molenaar  Radboud University   Nijmegen, Netherlands  I.molenaar@pwo.ru.nl   Carolien Knoop-van Campen  Radboud University   Nijmegen, Netherlands  c.vancampen@pwo.ru.nl   ABSTRACT  Even though the recent influx of tablets in primary education goes  together with the vision that educational technology empowered  with learning analytics will revolutionize education, empirical  results supporting this claim are scares. Adaptive educational  technology Snappet combines extracted and embedded learning  analytics daily in classrooms. While students make exercises on  the tablet this technology displays real-time data of learner  performance in a teacher dashboard (extracted analytics). At the  same time, learner performance is used to adaptively adjust  exercises to students progress (embedded analytics). This quasi- experimental study compares the development of students  arithmetic skills over one schoolyear (grade 2 and 4) in a  traditional paper based setting to learning with the adaptive  educational technology Snappet. The results indicate that students  in the Snappet condition make significantly more progress on  arithmetic skills in grade 4. Moreover, in this grade students with  a high ability level, benefit the most from working with this  adaptive educational technology. Overall the development pattern  of students with different abilities was more divergent in the AET  condition compared to the control condition. These results  indicate that adaptive educational technologies combining  extracted and embedded learning analytics are indeed creating  new education scenarios that contribute to personalized learning  in primary education.   CCS Concepts   Applied computing~Education      Applied computing~Computer-managed instruction     Applied computing~Computer-assisted instruction      Applied computing~Learning management systems      Applied computing~E-learning   Keywords  Educational technologies, primary education, arithmetics, ability  levels   1. INTRODUCTION  Even though the recent influx of tablets in primary education goes  together with the vision that educational technology empowered  with learning analytics will revolutionize education, empirical  results supporting this claim are scares [1]. Specifically, advances  are expected in adapting education to the needs of individual  students leading to enhanced educational effectiveness and  differentiated instruction [2, 3]. Effective usage of learning  analytics, however, in primary education is largely dependent on  the teacher. Consequently, an important issue is how to augment  teacher intelligence with learning analytics valuing the dynamics  between technology and human control. Central in this discussion  is the application of both extracted and embedded learning  analytics [4]. Extracted learning analytics make data actionable  for teachers through for instance visualizations, such as teacher  dashboards [5]. This allows teachers to adjust instruction and  feedback to the ability of the learners. Moreover, embedded  learning analytics automatically adjust of learning materials to  learners abilities for example, by adjusting exercises to the  current performance of a student [4]. Learning analytics thus  support teachers in making decisions to create learning  experiences that adapt to their students abilities. Learning  analytics in practice have the potential to change teaching and  learning for students with different ability levels in primary  education. This study provides insights on how extracted analytics  combined with embedded analytics are used in practice and what  the effects on students skill development are. This increases our  understanding of the combination of two forms of learning  analytics in interaction with the human role of the teacher in the  classroom. This quasi-experimental study compares the  development of students arithmetic skills over one schoolyear  (grade 2 and 4) in a traditional paper based setting (control  condition) to learning with the adaptive educational technology  Snappet (AET condition).  The adaptive educational technology Snappet leads to the  construction of a unique educational scenario in which elements  of traditional instruction are combined with innovative use of  technology. Classroom wide teacher instruction plays an  important role in this scenario. The technology captures real-time  data of learner performance, which are displayed to the teachers  concurrently on dashboards. Teachers use this information as  input to adjust their further instruction, modelling and feedback as  well as for the selection of classroom wide practices. Next  students continue to practice with adaptive exercises. This type of  practice supports sustained individual practice at the students  ability level.   Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work  for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that  copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial  advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the  first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must  be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.  Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04.  DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851     2. METHOD  In total, 11 schools, with 430 children from grade 2 and 4  participated (AET condition: 227 students, 47% girl, Control  condition: 203 students, 53% girl). The national standardized  arithmetic assessment, CITO Rekenen-Wiskunde [Arithmetic- Mathematics], was used to measure childrens arithmetic skills.  Based on previous CITO arithmetic scores, students were divided  in three ability levels. The high ability group represents the top  25% students of the Netherlands, the middle ability group  contains the middle 50% and finally the low ability group  represents the lowest 25% of students scoring the least. The log  files from the adaptive educational technology Snappet provided  detailed information on students practice activities. Class wide  exercises were the same for all students in the class, adaptive  exercises were adjusted to the students performance.  To examine the effect of Snappet on students arithmetics skill  development over one schoolyear, a two-way ANCOVA with  repeated measures was conducted, with time (June 2014 / June  2015) as within-subject-factor, with Condition (Snappet / control)  and ability level (high, middle, low) as between-subject-factors.  SES and Gender were included as covariates to control for the  differences between children in the AET and Control condition.   3. RESULTS  The analyses indicated no differences between the AET and the  control condition in arithmetic skill development over one  schoolyear in grade 2, see figure 1. Boys did make more progress  than girls and children with a middle and low ability level, made  more progress on arithmetic skills over one schoolyear compared  to children with a high ability level.  The analyses indicated a three-way interaction effect in grade 4:  children with a high ability level, made more progress in the AET  condition compared to children in the control condition (see  Figure 2).     Figure 1:  Grade 2 Arithmetic Scores per Condition per   Ability level.   4. DISCUSSSION  Learning with adaptive educational technology Snappet  had a  significant effect on childrens arithmetic skill development in  grade 4: also the results indicated a significantly greater progress  for high ability students arithmetic skill development in the AET  condition versus the control condition. In general, the application  of the AET supported a more divergent development pattern  between students in the three ability groups. In the control  condition a more convergence development  pattern between the  different ability groups was observed. This could be an indication   of more differentiated teaching practices of the teachers supported  with learning analytics.   Nevertheless, data showed great variation in the number of both  class wide and adaptive exercises made over different classrooms  and different schools. Although the majority of the teachers (98%)  indicated to use the EAT to personalize education, their usage of  adaptive exercises was only marginal percentages (21%) of the  total amount of exercises made by students. This indicates that the  combination of classroom wide instruction with adaptive forms of  practice is a challenge for teachers. Specifically the integration of  extracted and embedded analytic tools in daily practice deserves  special attention.       Figure 2: Grade 4 Arithmetic Scores per Condition per Ability   level.  This study showed that an adaptive educational technology that  combined extracted and embedded learning analytics indeed  created new education scenarios, which contributed to more  personalized learning in primary education. However, the large  variation in classroom wide and adaptive exercises does stress the  need for advanced efforts to support teachers in how to use  learning analytics. The challenge is to balance embedded analytics  and extracted analytics, in such a way that system strengths and  human strengths together optimally support personalized learning.   REFERENCES  [1] A. Papamitsou, Z. Economides, A. Anastasios. Learning   Analytics and Educational Data Mining in Practice: A  Systematic Literature Review of Empirical Evidence.  Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 17.4: 49- 64, 2014.   [2] D. Tempelaar, B. Rienties, B. Giesbers. In search for the  most informative data for feedback generation: Learning  Analytics in a data-rich context. Computers in Human  Behavior, 47: 157-167,2015.   [3] M. Fullan. Systems thinkers in action. Innovation. UK.  London: DfES with NCSL, 2004.   [4] A. Wis, Y, Zhou,, S. Hausknecht. Learning analytics for  online discussions: Embedded and extracted  approaches. Journal of Learning Analytics, 1.2: 48-71,  2014.   [5] K. Verbert, et al. Dataset-driven research to support  learning and knowledge analytics. Journal of  Educational Technology & Society, 15.3: 133-148,  2012.     