Uncovering what matters: Analyzing transitional relations among contribution types in knowledge-building discourse  Bodong Chen, Monica Resendes University of Toronto  252 Bloor Street West, Suite 9-118, IKIT Toronto, Ontario, Canada  bodong.chen@utoronto.ca monica.resendes@utoronto.ca  ABSTRACT Temporality matters for analysis of collaborative learning. The present study attempts to uncover temporal patterns that distinguish productive threads of knowledge building inquiry. Using a rich knowledge building discourse dataset, in which notes contribution types and threads productiv- ity have been coded, a secondary temporal analysis was conducted. In particular, Lag-sequential Analysis was con- ducted to identify transitional patterns among different con- tribution types that distinguish productive threads fromim- provable ones. Results indicated that productive inquiry threads involved significantly more transitions among ques- tioning, theorizing, obtaining information, and working with information; in contrast, responding to questions and theo- ries by merely giving opinions was not sufficient to achieve knowledge progress. This study highlights the importance of investigating temporality in collaborative learning and calls for attention to developing and testing temporal analysis methods in learning analytics research.  Categories and Subject Descriptors K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: Collaborative learn- ing; I.5.2 [Design Methodology]: Pattern analysis  General Terms Algorithms, Design, Measurement  Keywords Temporal analysis, Sequential analysis, Discourse analysis, Lag-sequential Analysis, Collaborative learning, Knowledge Building, Evidence-based research  1. INTRODUCTION Collaborative learning is understood as a dynamic, inter-  active, and continuous process that evolves over time. From  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. LAK 14, March 24 - 28 2014, Indianapolis, IN, USA ACM 978-1-4503-2664-3/14/03...$15.00. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567574.2567606  a social constructivist point of view, students learn through social interaction and communication with each other, with deep understanding achieved through exchanges that build on each other in a meaningful social context [23]. Thus, analysis of collaborative learning processes needs to attend to interpersonal interactions where group cognitions emerge [21], as well as interactions among ideas and conceptual ar- tifacts from which knowledge progress occurs [20, 6].  The significance of the temporal dimension for under- standing collaborative learning has been recognized by ear- lier research. However, in contrast to a wide spectrum of other popular techniques, it was only recently that tempo- rality was explicitly recognized as an important angle for an- alyzing collaborative learning [3, 7, 9, 24]. This phenomenon could be attributed to a theoretical gap, in that learning theories generally do not take temporality into considera- tion [15]. It could also be caused by a methodological chal- lenge, as little guidance is available for gathering temporal data and studying temporality of collaborative learning [8]. The present study attempts to bridge this gap, by advancing Lag-sequential Analysis as an analytic method emphasizing temporality and by showcasing its application in studying students knowledge building dialogues.  2. BACKGROUND  2.1 Temporality of learning processes A defining characteristic of interaction is that it unfolds  in time. This notion is reflected in extensive research of col- laborative groups [20, 21]. However, it is surprisingly rare that researchers investigate the temporal dimension of learn- ing. In most collaborative learning studies, a quantitative method referred to as coding and counting is normally ap- plied [22], which involves coding interaction data, counting occurrences of different types of interactions, and inspecting significant links between occurrences and interested learn- ing outcomes. In some cases this approach is combined with narrative accounts of group interactions attending to causal and temporal links among interaction types. Undoubtedly, such analyses based on coding and counting are useful in uncovering patterns attributing to productivity of collabora- tive learning. However, applying such a coding and count- ing approach often means the loss of temporal or sequential information of interactions. As pointed out in previous re- search [7], measures produced by this approach tell us a certain proportion of interactional content that was coded in a particular category but nothing about the sequence of  226    different categories; by aggregating counts over time, data get flattened out in the time dimension and information about temporal variation is unfortunately abandoned.  A growing body of research is starting to attend to the temporal dimension of collaborative learning. For example, Wise and Ming analyzed temporal patterns of knowledge construction in online discussions, focusing on consequences of role assignments [24]. By applying statistical discourse analysis attending to the progressive nature of knowledge construction, they identified pivotal postsposts initiat- ing new segments of discussion of higher knowledge con- struction qualityand found that assigning a summarizing role mid-discussion can facilitate group knowledge construc- tion. In another study, Dyke and colleagues incorporated interactive sliding window visualizations to understand how interactions develop over time and provided means to detect temporal irregularities in collaborative learning [3]. Also in- terested in applying visualization techniques, Halatchliyski and colleagues developed a novel approach of tracing idea flow in an online learning community based on scientomet- ric methodology [6]. By tracing temporal flow of ideas, their visualizations could help characterize contribution profiles of different authors. In summary, analyzing the temporal dimension of collaborative learning is fruitful and deserves more attention in learning analytics research.  2.2 Ways of contributing to knowledge build- ing discourse  The need for analyzing temporality of discourse could be well demonstrated in research of knowledge building, which is a renowned constructivist pedagogy in the learning sci- ences [20]. To help students see ideas as knowledge builders, knowledge building pedagogy puts ideas at the center and engages students to take cognitive responsibility for improv- ing them through communal discourse [18]. Such discourse is normally supported by Knowledge Forum, an online com- munity space where students can contribute ideas in the form of notes to shared knowledge spaces, or views [19]. Previous research has extensively documented various epis- temic roles in knowledge building classrooms, including pos- ing questions, drafting hypotheses, and designing experi- ments to collect data in order to test hypotheses [18, 25]. From a research perspective, an intriguing question is how the synergy of different types of contributions could bring about productive discourse that effectively advances knowl- edge. To start tackling this question, researchers focusing on mapping dialogue moves important to knowledge build- ing discourse have developed an inventory of ways of con- tributing to explanation-seeking discourse by applying the grounded theory approach on multiple years of Knowledge Forum notes produced by Grade 1-6 students [2]. Table 1 shows the current version of this scheme, which includes six major contribution categories and 24 sub-categories. This scheme has been useful in guiding content analysis of stu- dent online discourse and eliciting ways of contributing mea- sures potentially useful for diagnosing discourse [13]. How- ever, previous research in this area has neglected the tem- poral relations among different contribution types. Because knowledge building discourse is thought to be a complex, collaborative process of theory building that involves inter- actions among facts, theories built to explain facts, and var- ious types of actions to improve theories [20], without any understanding of the temporal relations among different con-  Table 1: Ways of contributing to knowledge building discourse coding scheme.  Questioning 1. Formulating an explanatory question 2. Asking a design question 3. Asking a factual question  Theorizing 4. Proposing an explanation 5. Supporting an explanation 6. Improving an explanation 7. Seeking an alternative explanation  Obtaining 8. Asking for evidence information 9. Designing experiment to test hypothesis  10. Reporting experiment results 11. Introducing facts from sources 12. Introducing facts from experience 13. Identifying design problems 14. Improving design problems  Working with 15. Providing evidence to support a theory information 16. Providing evidence to discard a theory  17. Weighing explanations 18. Accounting for conflicting explanations  Syntheses and 19. Synthesizing available ideas Analogies 20. Creating analogies  21. Initiating a rise-above Supporting 22. Using diagrams to communicate ideas Discussion 23. Giving an opinion  24. Acting as a mediator  tribution types, an important piece of the picture remains missing. The traditional coding and counting approach flattens plural, complex discourse data and falls short in ad- dressing interactions among different contribution types.  To bridge the gap of analyzing temporality in discourse- centric learning such as knowledge building, the present study advances Lag-sequential Analysis as a temporal analytic tech- nique and applies it in knowledge building discourse analysis. More specifically, this study attempts to answer the follow- ing research question: Suppose we could reliably assess the productivity of a knowledge building dialogue, what under- lying temporal patterns could distinguish dialogues which promote knowledge advancement  3. METHODS To tackle the research question, we performed secondary  analysis of knowledge building discourse data already coded in previous research.  3.1 Data sources Data analyzed in this study consisted of one year of Knowl-  edge Forum notes, collected from Grade 1-6 students who were doing knowledge building in science. These students were from a knowledge building school in downtown Toronto. In this school, there is only one class in each grade, with ap- proximately 22 students in each class. In this school, knowl- edge building pedagogy is introduced to students from Ju- nior Kindergarten and Knowledge Forum is used from Grade 1. Thus, all students and teachers involved in this study were comfortable with this pedagogy and the supportive technol- ogy. In a typical school year, science learning in all grades is organized around an overarching topic, such as water or trees, which further expands to a few big ideas in that con- tent area. Students bring in their authentic problems of un-  227    derstanding, build explanations together based on their real ideas, and make constructive use of authoritative sources when necessary to improve their ideas. To make their ideas public and open to be improved by the community, students write notes in Knowledge Forum extensively.  In this study, a total of 1101 notes produced by six grades were analyzed. An overview of the grades, science units, and number of analyzed notes in each unit is provided in Table 2. Primary data analysis on this dataset was conducted in previous research concerningways of contributing to knowl- edge building discourse and knowledge advancement in sci- ence learning [2, 13, 12]. This analysis included three as- pects: (1) coding types of contribution in each notebased on content analysis using the aforementioned ways of con- tributing scheme; (2) identifying inquiry threadsthrough grouping sets of notes by shared principal problems [25]; and (3) determining productivity of each inquiry threadbased on whether there was any occurrence of improving an ex- planation in the ways of contributing scheme (see Table 1), inquiry threads were divided into productive and improvable categories. Two raters coded all notes and achieved a cu- mulative agreement rate of 95.52% (Grade 1, 99.27%; Grade 2, 98.65%; Grade 3, 82.5%; Grade 4, 99.57%; Grade 5/6, 97.63%). Previous reports of this dataset have mainly fo- cused on percentages of contribution types and derived mea- sures such as contribution diversity and contribution rich- ness [1, 12].  3.2 Data analysis To recognize temporality as an aspect of analysis on this  dataset, we examined the transitional relations among con- tribution types in knowledge building discourse. Toward this end, we applied a temporal analysis technique named Lag-sequential Analysis (LsA) [16] on the dataset. Gener- ally, one central goal of LsA is to determine whether there is cross-dependence between a specified behavior and an- other behavior that occurs earlier in time [4]. It identifies contingency relationships in a sequence of observed behav- iors and enables researchers to explore cross-dependencies occurring in complex interactive sequences of behavior. As a simple and valuable method for summarizing interactions between behaviors, it has been found useful for studying in- teractions in many different contexts, including disruptive behaviors in classrooms and small group interactions [5, 11]. Comparing to counting measures in content analysis, LsA takes transitional relationships between contribution types into account. Thus, it could reveal significant insights into the temporal differences between productive and improvable knowledge building dialogues that are otherwise neglected.  To conduct LsA in this study, and to make LsA more ac- cessible to other researchers as well, we implemented an R program based on previous studies [10, 17].1 Using this R program, we computed a number of LsA measures, includ- ing: (1) transitional frequencies among all major contribu- tion typeshow often a particular transition occurred for a specified sequential lag; (2) expected transitional frequency the expected number of times a transition would occur under the null hypothesis of independence or no relation between the codes; (3) transitional probabilitiesa conditional prob- ability indicating the likelihood of, for example, behavior B occurring, given that behavior A occurred (the probability of  1Code is available at https://github.com/dirkchen/LsA un- der the GNU General Public License, version 3.  Table 3: Descriptive statistics of basic contribution measures in two types of inquiry threads.  Measures Productive Improvable Number of units 20.90 (9.15) 23.84 (12.44)  Number of units (merged) 14.23 (7.58) 15.74 (9.68) Questioning 4.77 (3.33) 5.53 (3.47)  Theorizing 9.19 (5.49) 11.89 (6.34) Obtaining information 2.42 (1.50) 1.89 (2.08)  Working with information 1.32 (2.06) 0.84 (1.64) Synthesizing and Analogies 0.42 (0.92) 0.58 (1.02)  Supporting discussion 2.77 (3.04) 3.11 (2.66)  B, given A, see [10]); (4) adjusted residualsz scores repre- senting the statistical significance of particular transitions; and (5) Yules Qstandardized measure ranging from -1 to +1 denoting strength of association. To uncover possible temporal patterns, we further compared these LsA measures between productive and improvable threads. Yules Q was finally adopted to represent the strength of transitional asso- ciation because it controls for base numbers of contributions and is descriptively useful (with a range from -1 to +1 and zero indicating no association).  4. RESULTS  4.1 Were productive and improvable threads different in basic contribution measures  The first comparisons between productive and improvable inquiry threads were made on a set of basic ways of con- tributing measures. These measures included: (1) number of discourse units (each unit is defined by a unique type of contribution rather than Knowledge Forum note), (2) num- ber of discourse units after merging adjacent units of a same contribution type, (3) occurrences of each main contribution category, and (4) percentage of each main contribution cat- egory. Table 3 shows descriptive statistics of these basic contribution measures. To compare differences of produc- tive and improvable inquiry threads, t-tests were conducted on these measures. Results found none of these descrip- tive measures significantly different between two types of threads. Thus, counting measures of contribution types were not adequate in predicting productivity of knowledge building discourse.  4.2 Uncovering sequential patterns: Transi- tions among contribution types  Analysis of the basic measures did not identify any signif- icant difference between productive and improvable threads. So what has made them different Although previous stud- ies found numbers of theorizing and working with informa- tion contributions predicted individual knowledge advance- ment [2], these measures fall short in predicting progress at the group level. If occurrences of contribution types were not proper indicators, was it because of the interplay among dif- ferent contribution types Were some contribution types fol- lowing each other more often in productive threads With- out analyzing temporality of knowledge building discourse an important piece of the story remains missing.  To tackle this problem, Lag-sequential Analysis measures were computed with sequential lag set as 1, focusing on di- rect transitions. To compare temporal difference between  228    Table 2: An overview of dataset. Grades Units Note count Thread count Productive threads Improvable threads Grade 1 Water 298 12 9 3 Grade 2 Trees 117 6 4 2 Grade 3 Fungus 193 8 5 3 Grade 4 Rocks and Minerals 262 11 6 5 Grade 5/6 Astronomy 231 13 7 6  two types of inquiry threads, t-tests were conducted on Yules Q scores (see Table 4).2 Results indicated productive threads had significantly higher number of transitions from work- ing with information to theorizing than improvable threads (t(48) = 2.10, p < .05), and marginally more transitions from theorizing to questioning (t(42) = 1.79, p = .08). It could be inferred that in productive threads students worked more constructively with resources and engaged in deepen questioning, as they incorporated information into theoriz- ing and questioned proposed theories more often. Mean- while, productive threads had less transitions from theo- rizing to supporting discussion (t(44) = -2.23, p < .05), as well as slightly less supporting discussion to question- ing (t(40) = -1.83, p = .08). Detailed analysis found most supporting discussion fell into the providing an opinion sub- category. It appeared responding to theorizing and ques- tioning by merely giving opinions was not sufficient for ad- vancing knowledge.  To expand the analysis from immediate transitions to in- direct transitions, we set sequential lag as 2 and applied the same Lag-sequential Analysis process. Results indicated productive threads had more indirect bidirectional transi- tions between questioning and obtaining information (t(45) = 1.88, p < .05 and t(40) = 1.99, p = .05), as well as be- tween theorizing and obtaining information (t(46) = 1.91, p = .06 and t(42) = 1.83, p = .07). Therefore, the integration of obtaining information with questioning and theorizing is also contributing to idea improvement. At the same time, similar to the analysis of immediate transitions, significantly less indirect transitions from questioning to supporting dis- cussion (t(34) = -2.00, p = .05) and from supporting discus- sion to theorizing (t(35) = -2.06, p < .05) were identified in productive threads.  5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS The present study argues for the importance of exam-  ining temporality in collaborative learning. Using a rich Knowledge Forum dataset, it attempts to investigate tem- poral patterns that can predict productivity of knowledge building discourse. To go beyond the coding and count- ingapproach applied in many learning sciences studies, this study applies Lag-sequential Analysis to study transitional relations among different ways of contributing in productive and improvable dialogues. As results indicated, while tra- ditional counting measures fall short in distinguishing two types of dialogues, a few sequential patterns were identi-  2Considering the space limit, only pairs of contribution types that were found significantly different between two types of threads are presented in the table. A-B denotes transition from contribution type A to type B. Abbreviations of names of contribution types are used: Qquestioning; T theorizing; OIobtaining information; WIworking with in- formation; SDsupporting discussion.  Table 4: Means and standard deviations of Yules Q in productive and improvable threads.  Productive Improvable Pairs Lag = 1 Lag = 2 Lag = 1 Lag = 2 Q-OI -0.23 (0.9) -0.64 (0.7) Q-SD -0.67 (0.7) -0.21 (0.8) T-Q 0.37 (0.7) 0.05 (0.6) T-OI -0.31 (0.8) -0.70 (0.6) T-SD -0.22 (0.9) 0.32 (0.8) OI-Q 0.11 (0.9) -0.39 (0.8) WI-T -0.35 (0.9) -0.77 (0.6) SD-Q -0.54 (0.8) -0.14 (0.7) SD-T -0.46 (0.8) -0.27 (0.7)  fied. In particular, productive threads of inquiry involved significantly more transitions among questioning, theorizing, obtaining information, and working with information, while improvable inquiry threads showed more transitions involv- ing giving opinions. Therefore, responding to questioning and theorizing by merely giving opinions is not sufficient to achieve knowledge progress in knowledge building. These findings are consistent with existing literature in recognizing the importance of constructive use of authoritative sources as an important component of productive knowledge build- ing [18, 25]. The bidirectional linkages between obtaining information and theorizing or questioning also highlight the progressive characteristic involving deepening inquiry as an important feature of effective discourse [20].  This study builds on previous research that highlights the importance of temporality. It contributes to learning analyt- ics literature by introducing knowledge building perspectives and to knowledge building research by uncovering temporal patterns worth further investigation. By developing an R program, it also makes Lag-sequential Analysis more acces- sible for researcher. For future directions, we will explore possibilities of developing embedded knowledge building an- alytic tools to boost identified favorable discourse behaviors. Given manual content analysis applied in this study appears non-feasible for developing large-scale, real-time assessment tools, substantial efforts is needed to automate the process of coding by applying recent computational linguistics tech- niques [14]. Since previous studies have showed efficacy of fairly simple tools in facilitating metadisourse and boost- ing students competencies [13], future work of knowledge building analytics based on the present study shows great promise in promoting collaborative learning.  6. REFERENCES [1] Y.-C. Chen, S. Park, and B. Hand. Unpacking the use  of talk and writing in argument-based inquiry: Instruction and cognition. In J. van Aalst,  229    K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson, and P. Reimann, editors, The future of learning: Proceedings of the 10th international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2012) aAS Volume 1, Full Papers, pages 159166. ISLS, Sydney, Australia, 2012.  [2] M. Chuy, J. Zhang, M. Resendes, M. Scardamalia, and C. Bereiter. Does Contributing to a Knowledge Building Dialogue lead to Individual Advancement of Knowledge In H. Spada, G. Stahl, N. Miyake, and N. Law, editors, Connecting Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning to Policy and Practice: CSCL2011 Conference Proceedings. Volume I - Long Papers, pages 5763. International Society of the Learning Sciences, 2011.  [3] G. Dyke, R. Kumar, H. Ai, and C. Rose. Challenging assumptions: Using sliding window visualizations to reveal time-based irregularities in CSCL processes. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson, and P. Reimann, editors, The future of learning: Proceedings of the 10th international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2012) - Volume 1, Full Papers, pages 363370. ISLS, Sydney, Australia, 2012.  [4] S. V. Faraone and D. D. Dorfman. Lag Sequential Analysis: Robust Statistical Methods. Psychological Bulletin, 101(2):312323, 1987.  [5] P. L. Gunter, S. L. Jack, R. E. Shores, D. E. Carrell, and J. Flowers. Lag Sequential Analysis as a Tool for Functional Analysis of Student Disruptive Behavior in Classrooms. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 1(3):138148, July 1993.  [6] I. Halatchliyski, T. Hecking, T. Gohnert, and H. U. Hoppe. Analyzing the flow of ideas and profiles of contributors in an open learning community. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge - LAK 13, page 66, New York, USA, 2013. ACM Press.  [7] M. Kapur. Temporality matters: Advancing a method for analyzing problem-solving processes in a computer-supported collaborative environment. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(1):3956, 2011.  [8] K. Littleton. Productivity through interaction: An overview. Learning with computers: Analysing productive interactions, pages 179196, 1999.  [9] N. Mercer. The Seeds of Time: Why Classroom Dialogue Needs a Temporal Analysis. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(1):3359, Feb. 2008.  [10] B. P. OConnor. Simple and flexible SAS and SPSS programs for analyzing lag-sequential categorical data. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 31(4):718726, Dec. 1999.  [11] L. L. Putnam. Small Group Work Climates A Lag-Sequential Analysis of Group Interaction. Small Group Research, 14(4):465494, 1983.  [12] M. Resendes. Enhancing knowledge building discourse in early primary education: Effects of formative feedback. PhD thesis, University of Toronto, 2013.  [13] M. Resendes, B. Chen, A. Acosta, and M. Scardamalia. The Effect of Formative Feedback on Vocabulary Use and Distribution of Vocabulary Knowledge in a Grade Two Knowledge Building Class. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan, and  S. Puntambekar, editors, To See the World and a Grain of Sand: Learning across Levels of Space, Time, and Scale: CSCL 2013 Conference Proceedings Volume 1 - Full Papers & Symposia, pages 391398. International Society of the Learning Sciences, 2013.  [14] C. Rose, Y.-C. Wang, Y. Cui, J. Arguello, K. Stegmann, A. Weinberger, and F. Fischer. Analyzing collaborative learning processes automatically: Exploiting the advances of computational linguistics in computer-supported collaborative learning. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(3):237271, 2008.  [15] W.-M. Roth. Learning science: A singular plural perspective. Sense Publishers, 2006.  [16] G. P. Sackett. The lag sequential analysis of contingency and cyclicity in behavioral interaction research. Handbook of infant development, 1:623649, 1979.  [17] G. P. Sackett, R. Holm, C. Crowley, and A. Henkins. A FORTRAN program for lag sequential analysis of contingency and cyclicity in behavioral interaction data. Behavior Research Methods & Instrumentation, 11(3):366378, May 1979.  [18] M. Scardamalia. Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith, editor, Liberal education in a knowledge society, pages 6798. Open Court, Chicago, IL, 2002.  [19] M. Scardamalia. CSILE/Knowledge Forum. In A. Kovalchick and K. Dawson, editors, Education and technology: An encyclopedia, pages 183192. ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara, CA, 2004.  [20] M. Scardamalia and C. Bereiter. Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K. Sawyer, editor, The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, pages 97115. Cambridge University Press, 2006.  [21] G. Stahl. Group cognition. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts; London, England, 2006.  [22] D. D. Suthers. Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3):315337, Aug. 2006.  [23] L. S. Vygotsky. Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1978.  [24] A. F. Wise and M. M. Chiu. Analyzing temporal patterns of knowledge construction in a role-based online discussion. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(3):445470, May 2011.  [25] J. Zhang, M. Scardamalia, M. Lamon, R. Messina, and R. Reeve. Socio-cognitive dynamics of knowledge building in the work of 9- and 10-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55(2):117145, Sept. 2007.  230      