
 

A Case Study to Track Teacher Gestures and Performance 
in a Virtual Learning Environment 

Roghayeh Barmaki, Charles E. Hughes 
Department of Computer Science  

University of Central Florida  
{barmaki, ceh} @ eecs.ucf.edu 

 
ABSTRACT 
As part of normal interpersonal communication, people send and 
receive messages with their body, especially with their hands. 
Gestures play an important role in teacher-student classroom 
interactions. In the domain of education, many research projects 
have focused on the study of such gestures either in real classrooms 
or in tutorial settings with experienced teachers. Novice teachers 
especially need to understand the messages they are sending 
through nonverbal communication as this can have a major effect 
on their ability to manage behaviors and deliver content. Such 
learning should optimally occur before experiencing the real 
classroom. To assist in this process, we have developed a virtual 
classroom environment- TeachLivE- and used it for teacher 
practice, reflection and assessment. This paper investigates the way 
teachers use gestures in the virtual classroom settings of 
TeachLivE. Biology and algebra teachers were evaluated in our 
study. Analysis of video recordings from real and virtual 
environment seems to indicate that algebra teachers gesture 
significantly more often than biology teachers. These results have 
implications for providing useful feedback to participant teachers.   

Keywords 
teacher preparation, professional development, virtual learning 
environment, gesture, grounding 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Gestures are a form of nonverbal communication in which visible 
bodily actions are used to communicate important messages, either 
in place of speech or together and in parallel with spoken words 
[7]. There has been extensive research in human factors, 
psychology and education on gesture within the last two decades 
[7, 14], but there are still many unexplored domains. In this study, 
we investigate the teachers’ use of gestures in an immersive 
teaching learning environment-TeachLivE™. Our target group 
includes biology and algebra high school teachers from the U.S. 
public school systems. 

2. GESTURE and EDUCATION 
Teachers’ gestures influence student comprehension and student 
learning, especially in instructional discourses [10, 14]. Some 
studies have shown that a speaker’s gestures facilitate listeners’ 
comprehension of speech [2]. In a survey by Roth in 2001, the role 
of gestures was studied in teaching and learning. This especially 
addressed the role of gestures in knowing and learning scientific 

and mathematical concepts in school-aged children [14]. 

Gesture movements are classified into four categories according to 
McNeill’s [11] study: iconics (the form is related to the semantic 
content of speech); metaphorics (linking to an abstract concept); 
deictics (pointing movements); and beats (not presenting a 
describable meaning). Macedonia et al. explored the impact of 
iconic gestures in foreign language word learning [9]. Their 
research indicated that iconic gestures in comparison to 
meaningless gestures helped the memorization of foreign language 
nouns in a significant fashion. In a similar work, Alibali et al. [1] 
introduced gestures as a means for teachers to scaffold students’ 
understanding. In their research, there was a hypothesis based on 
the work of Lakoff [8], which states that teachers use gestures to 
“ground” their instructional language, especially in abstract 
concepts. The analysis on selected video sessions of a mathematics 
lesson indicated that a teacher’s gesture was used most frequently 
for new materials, for referents that were highly abstract, and in 
response to students’ questions and comments [1]. Also, Pozzer-
Ardenghi et al. in [13] explored the videos of science lectures 
(subject: human body parts in biology high school classes). Their 
research indicates multimodal resources and nonverbal aspects of 
teaching may help students to be able to better articulate their 
conceptions and understandings with peers. 

3. STUDY 
The research presented here focuses on the gestures of biology and 
algebra teachers in an immersive learning environment- 
TeachLivE. TeachLivE was developed at the University of Central 
Florida to provide an interactive learning experience for teachers to 
hone their management, communication and content delivery skills. 
TeachLivE is based on digital puppetry software that controls five 
student avatars in a virtual classroom setting [12]. A single human-
in-the-loop (inter-actor) orchestrates the actions of the student 
avatars. For practitioners, it is possible to request the level of 
misbehavior and lesson plan of the classroom prior to their teaching 
sessions in order to leverage their professional development [3]. 

In this study, we analyze the video records of participant 
teachers to investigate how significantly gestures were used during 
the teaching sessions. The research of Alibali et al. [1] about 
algebra teaching class is used in our research as a reference for 
different types of gestures (pointing and representing gestures) that 
teachers may use in the classroom. One major difference between a 
virtual classroom setting and a real classroom is that, within the 
TeachLivE environment, there are no real students. This is an 
opportunity for novice teachers to rehearse and improve their skills 
without putting real children at risk [5]. For example, teachers can 
easily practice their targeted lesson plan several times until they 
master it. In contrast, based on specific features of this virtual 
classroom, it is not possible to track and study the student learning 
of virtual students in a manner that is similar to previous studies. 
Most research involving a teacher’s gestures and students’ learning 
have been done either in a real classroom or tutorial setting [1]. In a 

 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other 
uses, contact the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
LAK '15, Mar 16-20, 2015, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA 
ACM 978-1-4503-3417-4/15/03. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723650 
 

 
420



 

real setting, students’ perceptions and their pre/post-tests in the 
classroom have been used as indicators for their teacher’s skills, 
but such an approach is not useful in our virtual setting. One 
solution to resolve this is to use domain experts to review the 
nonverbal behavior of teachers using the video records and scale 
their harmony/grounding between speech and gestures. An 
alternate method is to do the pre/post-tests with the students whose 
teachers participate in the TeachLivE sessions. The first method 
could be helpful for the novice teachers who do not teach in any 
classes during the study, and the second way might be useful for 
other practicing and experienced teachers. 

In the biology study, 17 (female) biology teachers from Florida 
public schools participated. They were asked to teach virtual kids 
about the definition of technology and its applications in biology in 
one ten-minute session per month for four consecutive months. A 
reflection tool recorded the front view of the teacher while 
interacting with the virtual classroom shown on a huge TV display. 
In the next step, video records of teachers were analyzed by domain 
experts to see how the subjects benefit from their hand movements 
to explain new and abstract topics, or to respond to questions of 
virtual students. The experts did annotations for specific moments 
of the videos based on the given reference [1] over the 17×4 
videos. The analysis showed that only a few teachers (2 out of 17) 
used gestural representations frequently (at least 10 occurrences of 
gestural employment per session). Even though the use of gestures 
during the teaching is highly correlated with the concept and lesson 
plan; however, producing gestures by people during their speech is 
a spontaneous action, and may not be highly related to the context 
and lesson plan. In the second phase of the study, we will analyze 
the teaching sessions of 17 algebra teachers in TeachLivE. We 
hypothesize that, since algebra links to abstract concepts, teachers 
will use their gestures more fruitfully in these sessions. As a 
preliminary step, we reviewed video recordings of five algebra 
teachers in real classroom and noticed the impact of gesture 
employment in their teaching sessions; however, one can expect 
that there will be some differences with the gestures of teachers in 
the simulated classroom versus the real one. It is expected that the 
frequency of pointing and representing gestures will be higher in 
algebra teachers than found in the similar study of biology teachers. 

4. DISCUSSION 
Nonverbal communication, including kinesics, facial expressions 
and gestures provide huge amounts of information about the 
speaker. Hand gestures help listeners to scaffold the speaker’s talks 
specifically in instructional discourse. Teachers may benefit from 
gestures in their lectures that introduce new concepts to students for 
different courses, especially mathematics, sciences and linguistics. 
Focusing on biology and algebra teachers, we investigated the 
applications of gestures in a virtual classroom setting. Video 
analysis of biology teachers did not show very significant use of 
gestures during the teaching sessions except for two (out of 17 
subjects); however we expect to see more meaningful gestures 
from algebra teachers. It may not be reasonable to compare the 
results directly, and claim that biology teachers use their hand 
gestures less frequently than algebra teachers based on this pilot 
study. Some factors such as lesson plan and context, the personality 
of individual teachers, cultural influences and social behaviors 
could be involved in these results [1, 4, 11]; however it reminds us 
of the basic difference between math and the other sciences – 
applications of gestures by mathematics teachers significantly help 
students scaffolding and understanding of new concepts. These 
actions assist students to learn and remember new and abstract 
topics that are linked to the gestures. Our research is going to 

progress as follows: collecting data from participating algebra 
teachers in the simulated classroom, reviewing them and then 
reporting the final results. One promising, but very different 
direction is to invite participants with special needs, especially with 
autism to interact with the virtual students. 

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Drs. Lisa Dieker and Michael Hynes, 
TeachLivE’s principal investigators, and Dr. Carrie Straub, the 
educational research director of the project for the data collection. 
We wish to acknowledge support for the TeachLivE project from 
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (OPP1053202) and the 
National Science Foundation (CNS1051067, IIS111615). Any 
opinions expressed in this material are those of the authors and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors. 

6. REFERENCES 
[1]   Alibali, M. W. and Nathan, M. J. Teachers’ gestures as a means of 

scaffolding students’ understanding: Evidence from an early algeb- 
ra lesson. Video research in the learning sciences, (2007), 349-365. 

[2]    Alibali, M. W., Kita, S. and Young, A. J. Gesture and the 
process of speech production: We think, therefore we gesture. 
Language and cognitive processes, 15, 6 (2000), 593-613. 

[3]   Barmaki, R. Nonverbal Communication and Teaching 
Performance. Stamper, J., Pardos, Z., Mavrikis, M., McLaren, 
B.M. (eds.) In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Educational Data Mining (EDM). London, 2014, 441-443. 

[4]    Beheshti, R., Ali, A. M. and Sukthankar, G. Cognitive Social 
Learners: an Architecture for Modeling Normative Behavior. In 
Proceedings of the 29th AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence. (Jan). Austin, TX, 2015 (to appear). 

[5]    Hayes, A. T., Straub, C. L., Dieker, L. A., Hughes, C. E. and 
Hynes, M. C. Ludic Learning: Exploration of TLE TeachLivE™ 
and Effective Teacher Training. International Journal of Gaming 
and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 5, 2 (2013), 20-33. 

[6]    Kelly, S. D., Manning, S. M. and Rodak, S. Gesture gives a hand 
to language and learning: Perspectives from cognitive 
neuroscience, developmental psychology and education. 
Language and Linguistics Compass, 2, 4 (2008), 569-588. 

[7]    Kendon, A. Gesture: Visible action as utterance. Cambridge 
University Press, 2004. 

[8]    Lakoff, G. and Núñez, R. E. Where mathematics comes from: 
How the embodied mind brings mathematics into being. Basic 
books, 2000. 

[9]    Macedonia, M., Müller, K. and Friederici, A. D. The impact of 
iconic gestures on foreign language word learning and its neural 
substrate. Human brain mapping, 32, 6 (2011), 982-998. 

[10]  McNeil, N. M., Alibali, M. W. and Evans, J. L. The role of 
gesture in children's comprehension of spoken language: Now 
they need it, now they don't. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior. 24, 
2 (2000), 131-150. 

[11]  McNeill, D. Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about 
thought. University of Chicago Press, 1992. 

[12]  Nagendran, A., Pillat, R., Kavanaugh, A., Welch, G. and 
Hughes, C. A unified framework for individualized avatar-based 
interactions. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 
23, 2 (2014), 109-132. 

[13]  Pozzer-Ardenghi, L. and Roth, W. On performing concepts 
during science lectures. Science Education, 91, 1 (2007), 96-114. 

[14]  Roth, W. Gestures: Their Role in Teaching and Learning. Review 
of Educational Research, 71, 3 (2001), 365-392. 

 
421





