
Ubiquitous Learning Analytics in the Context of Real-
world Language Learning

Kousuke Mouri 
Kyushu University 

744 Motooka, Nishi-Ku 
Fukuoka, 819-0395, Japan 

+81-92-802-5875 
mourikousuke@gmail.com 

Hiroaki Ogata 
Kyushu University 

744 Motooka, Nishi-Ku 
Fukuoka, 819-0395, Japan 

+81-92-802-5875 
hiroaki.ogata@gmail.com 

Noriko Uosaki 
Osaka University  
1-1 Yamadaoka  

Suita, 565-0871, Japan 
+81-6-6879-4013 

n.uosaki@gmail.com 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
This paper describes a method of the visualization and analysis for 
mining useful learning logs from numerous learning experiences 
that learners have accumulated in the real world as the ubiquitous 
learning logs. Ubiquitous Learning Log (ULL) is defined as a 
digital record of what learners have learned in the daily life using 
ubiquitous technologies. It allows learners to log their learning 
experiences with photos, audios, videos, location, RFID tag and 
sensor data, and to share and reuse ULL with others. By 
constructing real-world corpora which comprise of accumulated 
ULLs with information such as what, when, where, and how 
learners have learned in the real world and by analyzing them, we 
can support learners to learn more effectively. The proposed 
system will predict their future learning opportunities including 
their learning patterns and trends by analyzing their past ULLs. 
The prediction is made possible both by network analysis based 
on ULL information such as learners, knowledge, place and time 
and by learners' self-analysis using time-map. By predicting what 
they tend to learn next in their learning paths, it provides them 
with more learning opportunities. Accumulated data are so big 
and the relationships among the data are so complicated that it is 
difficult to grasp how closely the ULLs are related each other. 
Therefore, this paper proposes a system to help learners to grasp 
relationships among learners, knowledge, place and time, using 
network graphs and network analysis.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: Computer Supported 
Ubiquitous Learning 

General Terms 
Measurement, Performance, Design 

Keywords 
Ubiquitous learning log, network analysis, time map, network 

graph 

1. INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, many researchers in the educational engineering 
area have been studying focusing on ubiquitous theme. For 
example, CSUL (Computer Supported Ubiquitous Learning) or 
context-aware ubiquitous learning (u-learning) is defined as a 
technology-enhanced learning environment supported by 
ubiquitous computing technologies such as mobile devices, QR-
code, RFID tag and wireless sensor networks [1], [2]. These 
learning take place not only in-class learning but also in a variety 
of out-class learning space such as home, library and museum.  

For example, Hwang et al. reported about their ubiquitous 
learning system that targeted personal learners using PDA 
(Personal Digital Assist) at an elementary school nature science 
course in Taiwan [3]. In their developed system, the learners can 
develop a concept map [4] based on what they have learned from 
text book. Also, the learners can revise and review their concept 
map using PDA in the field. Similarly, Ogata et al. reported about 
their ubiquitous learning system called SCROLL [5]. The system 
will allow them to share with others by recording what they have 
learned on web browser and mobile device. 

These learning dataset in the ubiquitous learning system include 
spatiotemporal data. Spatiotemporal data usually contain the states 
of an object, an event or a position in space over a period of time. 
These datasets might be collected at different locations, various 
time points in different formats. It poses many challenges in 
representing, processing, analysis and mining of dataset due to 
complex structure of spatiotemporal objects and the relationships 
among them in both spatial and temporal dimensions [6], [7]. 
Similarly, it poses many issues about relationship between the 
learners and the ubiquitous learning logs due to complex structure 
of the ubiquitous learning logs in SCROLL. In addition, it is 
important for learners to recognize what and how they have 
learned by analyzing and visualizing the past ULLs, so that they 
can improve what and how to learn in future [2]. To tackle these 
issues, it is necessary to reveal relationships between the learners 
and the ubiquitous learning logs. 

Therefore, this paper proposes a system to analyze and visualize 
relationships between the learners and the ubiquitous learning logs 
in SCROLL using Time-map and network graph. The objective of 
this study will reveal what and how they have learned in their 
daily lives, so that the system will recommend the prediction such 
as knowledge, place and time in the next learning step to the 
learners by analyzing them. By realizing these challenges, the 
significances and contributions of this paper is to allow the 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
LAK '15, March 16 - 20, 2015, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA 
Copyright 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-3417-4/15/03…$15.00 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723598 

378



learners to predict the method of learning new knowledge in the 
next step at the real time in the real world. This research is a 
necessary precursor in order to realize an innovative learning 
method in the next-generation education which integrates 
Augmented Reality (AR) and ubiquitous technologies. 

2. Related Works  
2.1 Time Map 
Time-map is a library of javascript, which collaborated with 
Google map and SIMILE (Semantic Interoperability of Metadata 
and Information in unLike Environments) TimeLine (SIMILE 
project) [8]. SIMILE focuses on developing robust, open source 
tools that empower users to access, manage, visualize and reuse 
digital assets. The time-map function means that the user can 
scroll the timeline and then the Google map will display the 
learning logs recorded during learners’ selected period. It is 
designed to help learners to reflect what they have learned. For 
example, if a learner clicks his learning logs on timeline, Google 
map will display their positions as shown in Figure 1. After 
visualizing log information, Time-map will facilitate learners to 
reflect on their logs with spatio and temporal information. They 
are able to grasp their learning context and time zone. Also, it is a 
possibility that the geographic information is a clue of recalling 
what they have learned. 
 

 
Figure 1. Time Map 

2.2 Network Analysis 
Network analysis is a method of effective analysis to reveal 
relevance of the data and educational improvement in the future. 
For example, Shane et al. analyzed to reveal relationships between 
the citation and all paper that were published in the first three 
editions of the international conference on LAK (LAK 2011, 2012 
and 2013) [9]. They have reported that for the further 
development of this field it is important to reflect on the diversity 
of disciplines and methodologies that have contributed to the 
current state of learning analytics research.  

This paper was analyzed using the following well-established 
measures in social network analysis, in order to reveal 
relationships between the learners and the ubiquitous learning logs 
[10], [11]. 
1. Degree: the number of edges a node has in a network 
2. Closeness: the distance of a node to all other nodes in the 

network 

3. Betweenness: the number of shortest paths between any two 
nodes that pass via a given node 

This system was constructed to automatically visualize and 
analyze relationships between the learners and the ubiquitous 
learning logs in accordance with each learner. Also, all social 
networking variables were computed using Gephi open source 
software for social network analysis [12].  

3. Design of the system 
3.1 SCROLL 
With the evolution of the mobile device, people prefer to record 
learning contents using mobile devices instead of taking memos 
on paper. SCROLL allows the learners to record learning logs 
using mobile device and personal computer. One of the objectives 
of SCROLL is to support international students in Japan to learn 
Japanese language from what they have learned formal and 
informal setting. It adopts an approach of sharing user created 
contents among users and is constructed based on a LORE (Log-
Organize-Recall-Evaluate) model which is shown in Figure 2 [5]. 
 

 
Figure 2. LORE model 

3.2 How to collect the ubiquitous learning log 
As shown in Figure 3, the learners can record the ubiquitous 
learning log with a photo using mobile device and SCROLL. The 
learning log includes meta-data such as author, language, created 
time, location (latitude and longitude) and tag, and the learners 
can search target ubiquitous learning log object (ULLO) by them.  

 

 
Figure 3. An example of adding a ULLO 

3.3 Three-Layer structures in SCROLL 
To visualize and analyze several relationships between the 
learners and the ubiquitous learning logs, we have uniquely 
defined them as three-layers structures as shown in Figure 4. 

379



The upper layer contains each author in order to confirm position 
of own or other learners. For example, if a learner learned various 
ubiquitous learning logs on SCROLL, there is a possibility that 
other learners had already learned it. Therefore, when the learner 
learned them, they can grasp other learners’ status with past 
learning experiences. 

The intermediate layer contains the knowledge that learners 
learned. Also, some fields of learning tasks can be included in this 
layer. For example, some task-based learning in ubiquitous 
learning environment can be carried out using knowledge and 
event [14]. The scalability of the layers can be enhanced and the 
field of visualization can be widened by linking one’s own 
learning logs to the knowledge learned by doing tasks. 

The lowest layer contains data such as location and time. The 
layer allows the learners to grasp when and where they have 
learned by revealing place and time. 

Analysis by categorizing three-layers has following advantages: 

1. Places with a large number of links to the related knowledge 
are the places where they can learn a lot of knowledge. For 
example, if a certain supermarket or convenience is related 
with a lot of knowledge such as natto (a traditional Japanese 
food made from fermented soybeans), green soy beans, tofu, 
miso soup, and cup noodle, by analyzing relationships 
between the knowledge and the location. The System can 
provide learners with a valuable learning information. 

2. Knowledge which is related to many places is the 
knowledge which we can learn in various places. For 
example, if a learner experience tea ceremony of a 
traditional Japanese culture at the university in Japan, a set 
of tea ceremony related knowledge (e.g. tea, seize: to sit in 
the correct manner on a Japanese tatami mat) can be learned 
in other various places. The tea can be learned by 
purchasing at the supermarket and the seiza can be learned 
at the martial art gym. 

 
Figure 4. Three-layer structure in SCROLL 

4. Implementation 
4.1 The layout types of the network graph 
In this paper, we have implemented the network layout as shown 
in Figure 5. The network layout consists of using three basic 
layouts and an original layout we developed. 

The first layout consists of using the random network as shown in 
Figure 5 (1). It is simple algorism generating them randomly on 
the graph after filtering some nodes, and then the system will link 
related node and node. 

The second layout consists of using force-directed layout as 
shown in Figure 5 (2). It is a force vector algorithm proposed in 
the Gephi software, appreciated for its simplicity and for the 

Figure 5. The layouts of network graph 

380



readability of the network it helps to visualize [15]. 

The third layout consists of using Yifan Hu multilevel layout as 
shown in Figure 5 (3) [16]. It is a very fast algorithm to reduce the 
complexity. The repulsive forces on one node from a cluster of 
distant nodes are approximated by a Barnes-Hut calculation, 
which treats them as one super-node [17]. 

The final layout consists of using the original layout we have 
developed as shown in Figure 5 (4a). The original layout will be 
categorized four areas as shown in Figure 5 (4b). The word-
centered on collocational network is shown in time-series order 
what they have learned. Similarly, the place-centered on 
collocational network is visualized the place linking each other, 
and the time-centered on collocational network is visualized the 
time linking each other. 

4.2 Color of visualized nodes 
The learners might get confused when they recognize past 
learning logs because there might be too many of visualized nodes. 
Therefore, it is definitely necessary to establish some criteria for 
distinction of each node. To effectively distinguish kind of each 
node, we defined as below using node color.  

• Pink color node shows the learner’s own name on the upper 
layer. If connecting the pink node to yellow node on the 
intermediate layer, edge color will be decided as pink so that 
they can be easily recognized as the learner’s own logs 

• Blue color node shows the names of other learners on the 
upper layer. If connecting the blue node to yellow color 
node on the intermediate layer, edge color is decided blue 
color. 

• Green color node shows the names of veteran or famous 
learner on the upper layer. Ig connecting the yellow node to 
the green node on the intermediate layer, edge color will be 
decided as green color. 

• Yellow color node shows both the learner own knowledge 
and the knowledge of other learners. For example, the 

learner can recognize his own knowledge because edge 
between the learner own name on the upper layer and the 
knowledge on the intermediate layer is pink color. In 
addition, the learner might discover knowledge of other 
learners related to own knowledge. 

• White color node shows the location of the learners on the 
lowest layer. The node includes latitude, longitude, building 
names and the attributes. 

• Brown color node shows created time of the knowledge on 
the lowest layer. The created time is categorized to attributes 
such as "morning", "midday", "evening", "Spring", 
"Summer", "fall" and "winter". 

4.3 System interface for visualizing and 
analyzing 
The interface combining network graph and time-map for 
visualizing relationships between the learners and ubiquitous 
learning logs is shown Figure 8. It consists of the following 
components:  

1. Search form: This input form is used to search target word 
(e.g. ‘natto’ and ‘tofu’) on the all networks of SCROLL. 

2. Layout form: The learners will choose one layout in this 
select form (e.g. Random layout, Force-directed layout, 
Yifan multilevel layout and original layout). 

3. Network graph: The network graph shows the layout 
calculated by the system, and the layout in Figure 9 shows a 
sample of the original layout. Also, the network graph and 
time map function are linked each other. For example, if a 
learner clicked a certain node on the network graph, the time 
map will show the location and time corresponding to it. 
Therefore, learners can obtain its location and time 
information. 

4. Time map: Time map function consists of the timeline and 
Google map. It represents the shift of learning history in 

Figure 6. Interface of this system 

381



accordance with lapse of time. Learners might forget their 
learning logs when and where they have learned before. 
Therefore, the system will remind them of their learning 
logs recorded during the specified period of time by 
showing them on the timeline (default: two month before 
and after the setting time). Besides, the system will lead 
them to be aware of knowledge recorded right before or 
after the knowledge of their interest which was recorded by 
other learners. Therefore, it will give them a clue on what to 
learn in the next learning step. 

5. Analysis results (Knowledge): The analysis by knowledge is 
shown as a trend ranking in order to expand their learning 
opportunity. By arranging ULLs in the in-degree centrality 
order, they will know ULLs that they are likely to study in 
the next step. That way they are able to have more learning 
opportunity. 

6. Analysis results (Place): Place analysis is based on locations 
where they have learned. The place of high importance 
means the location where there are a lot of opportunities to 
learn if visiting them. It is analyzed in the same way as in-
degree centrality analysis, and the system shows the results 
to the learners. 

5. Conclusion and Future Work 
This paper describes the system for analyzing and visualizing 
relationships between the learners and the ubiquitous learning logs. 
International students can add their knowledge as the ubiquitous 
learning log in SCROLL, and then SCROLL can provide learning 
contents to recall what they learned based on their learning 
contexts.  

As future works, it is necessary to recommend and present past 
learning logs on the system in accordance with each learner's 
condition detected from some results such as social analysis, 
association analysis and decision tree. In addition, it is also 
necessary to evaluate whether detected analysis results are 
appropriate or not. 

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The part of this research work was supported by the Grant-in-Aid 
for Scientific Research No.25282059, No.26560122, No. 
25540091 and No.26350319 from the Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) in Japan. The 
research results have been partly achieved by “Research and 
Development on Fundamental and Utilization Technologies for 
Social Big Data” (178A03), the Commissioned Research of 
National Institute of Information and Communications 
Technology (NICT), Japan. 

7. REFERENCES 
 
[1] Ogata, H., and Yano, Y. (2004). Context-aware support for 

computer-supported ubiquitous learning. Proc. of IEEE 
International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile 
Technologies in Education, 27-34.  

[2] Hwang, G. J., Tsai, C. C. and Yang, S. J. H. (2008). Criteria, 
strategies and research issues of context-aware ubiquitous 
learning. Educational Technology and Society, 11(2), 81-91. 

[3] Hwang, G. J., Wu, P.H. and Ke, H.R. (2011). An interactive 
concept map approach to supporting mobile learning 
activities for natural science courses, Computers and 
Education, vol.57, no.4, pp.2272-2280. 

[4] Joseph, D.N. and Alberto, J.C. (2006). The Origins of the 
concept mapping tool and the continuing evolution of the 
tool, Information Visualization, no.5, pp.175-184. 

[5] Ogata, H., Li, M., Bin, H., Uosaki, N., El-Bishoutly, M., & 
Yano, Y. (2011). SCROLL: Supporting to share and reuse 
ubiquitous learning logs in the context of language learning. 
Research and Practice on Technology Enhanced Learning, 6 
(3), pp.69-82. 

[6] K.Venkateswara R, A.Govardhan and Dr.K.V.Chalapati R. 
(2011). Discovering Spatiotemporal Topological 
Relationships, The second international workshop on 
Database Management Systems, DMS-2011,Springer 
Proceedings LNCS-CCIS 198. 

[7]  K.Venkateswara R & A.Govardhan. (2012). Spatiotemporal 
data mining: Issues, Task and Applications, International 
Journal of Computer Science and Engineering Survey, Vol.3, 
No.1, Feb2012, pp.39-52. 

[8] SIMILE project: http://www.simile-widgets.org/timeline/ 
[9] Shane, D., Dragon, G., George, S. and Srecko, J. (2014). 

Current State and Future Trends: A Citation Network 
Analysis of the Learning Analytics Field, International 
conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (LAK 
2014) ACM, pp.231-240.  

[10] Freeman, L.C. (1978). Centrality in social networks 
conceptual clarification, Social Networks, vol.1, no.3, 
pp.215-239. 

[11] Watts, D.J and Strogatz, S.H. (1998). Collective dynamics of 
small world networks, Nature 393, 6684, pp.440-442. 

[12] Bastian, M., Heymans, S and Jacomy, M. (2009). Gephi: An 
open source Software for Exploring and Manipulating 
Networks, In Proceedings of the Third International AAAI 
Press.  

[13] Li, M., Ogata, H., Hou, B., Uosaki, N., & Yano, Y. (2012). 
Personalization in Context-aware Ubiquitous Learning-Log 
System,  Mobile and Ubiquitous Technology in Education, 
pp.41-48. 

[14] Mouri,K., Ogata, H., Li, M., Hou, B., Uosaki, N., & Liu, S. 
(2013). Learning Log Navigator: Supporting Task-based 
Learning Using Ubiquitous Learning Logs, Journal of 
Research and Practice on Technology Enhanced Learning 
(RPTEL), 8(1), pp.117-128. 

[15] Mathieu, J., Tommaso, V., Sebastien, H and Mathieu, B. 
(2014). ForeceAtlas2, a Continuous Graph Layout Algorithm 
for Handy Network Visualization Designed for the Gephi 
Software, in PLOS One 9(6):e98679. doi: 10.1371/ journal. 
pone. 0098679, Jun 10. 

[16] Y. F. Hu. (2005). Efficient and high quality force-directed 
graph drawing, The Mathematica Journal, vol. 10, pp.37–71. 

[17] J. Barnes and P. Hut. (1986). A Hierarchical O (n log n) 
Force-Calculation Algorithm, Nature, 324(4), pp.446-449.

 

382





