
Minimum Information Entropy Based
Q-matrix Learning in DINA Model

Shiwei Ye
University of China Academy

of Science
Beijing, China

shiwye@ucas.ac.cn

Yuan Sun
National Institute of

Informatics
Tokyo, Japan

yuan@nii.ac.jp

Haobo Wang
University of China Academy

of Science
Beijing, China

wanghaobo@ucas.ac.cn
Yi Sun

University of China Academy
of Science

Beijing, China
sunyi@ucas.ac.cn

ABSTRACT
Cognitive diagnosis models (CDMs) are of growing interest
in test development and measurement of learners’ perfor-
mance. The DINA (deterministic input, noisy, and gate)
model is one of the most widely used models in CDM. In this
paper, we propose a new method and present an alternating
recursive algorithm to learn Q-matrix and uncertainty vari-
ables, slip and guessing parameters, based on Boolean Ma-
trix Factorization (BMF) and Minimized Information En-
tropy (MIE) respectively for the DINA model. Simulation
results show that our algorithm for Q-matrix learning has
fast convergence to the local optimal solutions for Q-matrix
and students’ knowledge states A matrix. This is especially
important and applicable when the method is extended to
big data.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.8 [Metrics]: Performance measures; D.4.8 [Performance]:
Measurements; F.2.1 [Numerical Algorithms and Prob-
lems]: Computations on matrices; I.2.6 [Learning]: Con-
cept learning, Parameter learning

General Terms
Algorithms, Measurement, Performance, Theory

Keywords
Rule Space,Q-matrix, Boolean Matrix Factorization, approx-
imation algorithm

1. INTRODUCTION

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
LAK’15 Mar 16-20, 2015, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA
ACM 978-1-4503-3417-4/15/03.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723653.

Cognitive diagnosis has recently gained prominence in e-
ducational assessment, and other disciplines [1] [2] [3] [4].
Central to cognitive diagnostic models (CDMs) is the well-
known Q-matrix, which specifies the item-attribute relation-
ships. How to specify Q-matrix is without a doubt the most
important issue to put diagnostic assessment into practice.
In addition to typical Q-matrix specification by domain ex-
perts, data-driven Q-matrix learning is attracting more at-
tentions recently.

Among the CDMs, the DINA (deterministic input, noisy,
and gate) model is one of the most widely used models and
considered as the foundation [5] [6]. In this paper we propose
a new framework for DINA model-based Q-matrix learn-
ing under the assumption that attribute dimensions are not
available in real situations. In Section 2, we spontaneously
transfer the Q-matrix learning problem into Boolean Ma-
trix Factorization (BMF) problem [7] to obtain attribute
dimensions. Because BMF is an NP-hard problem [9][10],
we develop an alternating recursive method to find approx-
imate solution by adding one dimension in attribute latent
space in each step. Accordingly we describe that uncertainty
variables slip and guessing parameters in the DINA model
can be analytically estimated through the Maximum Infor-
mation Entropy(MIE). The simulation results are shown in
Section 3 and finally the conclusion is given in Section 4.

2. CONJUNCTIVE MODEL, BMF AND DI-
NA MODEL

For conjunctive model, based on the student’s knowledge
states andQ-matrix for items, an ideal item response matrix,
denotedR, can be generated , whose elementRij is typically
represented in the following form.

Rij(A,Q) = ?Ki=1?
qjk
ik =

{
1 ?ik ? qjk, k = 1, . . . ,K
0 ?ik < qjk),?k ? {1, . . . ,K}

(1)

Here Rij is the latent response variable of the ith student
with the latent knowledge states ?i to the jth item, while
qj indicating whether the student i has all the attributes k
required for item j. It represents a deterministic prediction
of item response from each student’s knowledge state.

Based on BMF [8], we verified the equation (1) can be

404



expressed in a Boolean relations of the knowledge states A
matrix and the Q-matrix as follows (see [7] for details).

R = A??QT =
(
?ks=1uisvsj

)m×n
(2)

where ? represents the Boolean matrix product and ? de-
notes the maximum (truth function of logical disjunction).

In the DINA model, probability of a student’s correct re-
sponse to an test item is determined by two error probabil-
ities, and one latent response variable. The slip probability
(sj) represents the probability of getting a wrong response
on the jth item when all required attributes are present,
while the guessing probability (gj) represents the probabil-
ity of getting a correct response on the j th item when at
least one required attribute is lacking. The student’s at-
tribute patterns ?i = (?i1, ?i2, ..., ?iK), called knowledge
states, indicate the i th student’s mastery status in terms
of the K attributes, and A represents students’ knowledge
states matrix here.

For simplification, we denote B = A,C(i, j) = R(i, j),
then the DINA model can be defined as the following.

P (R(i, j)|B,Q) =
m?
i=1

n?
j=1

s
R(i,j)C(i,j)
j g

R(i,j)C(i,j)
j (3)

× (1? sj)R(i,j)C(i,j)(1? gj)R(i,j)C(i,j)

where C = B ? QT . The optimization problem can be ex-
pressed to find the maximum likelihood of conditional prob-
ability on matrices B and Q

E(B,Q) =

m?
i=1

n?
j=1

lnP (R(i, j)|B,Q) (4)

The optimization process for the above equation can be
done by our iterative algorithm on every column of matri-
ces B and Q based on equation equation (2) and equation
(4). After obtaining the matrix B and Q, the slip and guess-
ing parameters can be obtained analytically. Due to space
limitations, proofs and details of algorithms are omitted.

3. SIMULATION RESULTS
The data we used in this study is from the paper [11],

where EM algorithm approach for DINA model-based Q-
matrix learning have been proposed. Their research mainly
focuses on statistical validation and hypothesis testing for
the Q-matrix, and it also indicates sufficient and necessary
conditions under which the model parameters are identifi-
able from the response data. However, in their algorithms
the number of attributes in the to-be-estimated Q-matrix is
assumed to be known because true and designed Q-matrices
are needed to be compared. Under the same settings as
in the paper [11], the estimated Q-matrix and the true Q-
matrix were compared based on our proposed algorithm.
Due to lack of space, the detailed descriptions on our simu-
lation and results cannot be shown here.

As a result, it was shown that our iteration algorithm had
fast convergent speed. In the simulation, we repeated the
experiment 100 times, and we also found that if the number
of students M ? 1000, in every round the Q-matrix can be
completely restored.

Based on our simulation results, it was revealed that our
algorithm was immune to initial values of slip and guessing
parameters as well. Both of them were always convergent to

the values between 0.1 and 0.2 which are normal values in
general testing environment.

4. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a new method and present-

ed an alternating recursive algorithm to learn Q-matrix and
uncertainty variables slip and guessing based on Boolean
matrix factorization (BMF) and maximum information en-
tropy (MIE) for the DINA model of CDMs. Simulation re-
sults show that our algorithm has fast convergence to the
local optimal solutions for matrices B and Q. Moreover,
our algorithm is also immune to initial values of slip and
guessing parameters. The proposed method could be espe-
cially important and effective when it is applied to big data.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-

bers 26560134 and 25280121.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Tatsuoka, K. K. 1983. Rule space: an approch for

dealing with misconceptions based on item response
theory. Journal of Educational Measurement, 20,
345-354.

[2] Rupp, A., Templin, J. and Henson, R. A. 2010.
Diagnostic Measurement: Theory, Methods, and
Applications. Guilford Press.

[3] Barnes, T. 2010. Novel derivation and application of
skill matrices: The Q-matrix method. Handbook on
Educational Data Mining. 159-172.

[4] Koedinger, K.R., McLaughlin, E.A., Stamper, J.C.
2012. Automated student model improvement. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Educational Data Mining.

[5] de la Torre, J. 2008. An empirically-based method of
Q-matrix validation for the DINA model: Development
and applications. Journal of Educational
Measurement,45, 343-362.

[6] DeCarlo, L. T. 2012. Recognizing uncertainty in the
Q-matrix via a Bayesian extension of the DINA model.
Applied Psychological Measurement, 36, 447-468.

[7] Sun, Y., Ye, S.W., Inoue, S., Sun, Y. 2014. Alternating
Recursive Method for Q-matrix Learning. Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference on Educational
Data Mining (EDM 2014), page 14-20.

[8] Vaidya, J. 2012. Boolean Matrix Decomposition
Problem: Theory, Variations and Applications to Data
Engineering. IEEE 28th International Conference on
Data Engineering

[9] Belohlavek, R., Vychodi, V. 2010. Discovery of optimal
factors in binary data via a novel method of matrix
decomposition, Journal of Computer and System
Sciences 76:3-20

[10] Miettinen, P., Mielikainen, T., Gionis, A., Das, G.,
Mannila, H. 2008. The Discrete Basis Problem. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
20(10), 1348-1362.

[11] Liu, J., Xu, G., Ying, Z. 2012. Data-driven learning of
q-matrix. Applied Psychological Measurement. 36(7),
548-564.

405





