
Using learning analytics to explore help-seeking learner profiles
in MOOCs

Linda Corrin
University of Melbourne
Level 6, 111 Barry Street

Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
lcorrin@unimelb.edu.au

Paula G. de Barba
University of Melbourne

Elisabeth Murdoch Building
Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia

paula.de@unimelb.edu.au

Aneesha Bakharia
University of ?eensland

Learning Innovation Building
St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia

a.bakharia1@uq.edu.au

ABSTRACT
In online learning environments, learners are o?en required to
be more autonomous in their approach to learning. In scaled on-
line learning environments, like Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs), there are di?erences in the ability of learners to access
teachers and peers to get help with their study than in more tradi-
tional educational environments. ?is exploratory study examines
the help-seeking behaviour of learners across several MOOCs with
di?erent audiences and designs. Learning analytics techniques (e.g.,
dimension reduction with t-sne and clustering with a?nity propa-
gation) were applied to identify clusters and determine pro?les of
learners on the basis of their help-seeking behaviours. Five help-
seeking learner pro?les were identi?ed which provide an insight
into how learners’ help-seeking behaviour relates to performance.
?e development of a more in-depth understanding of how learners
seek help in large online learning environments is important to
inform the way support for learners can be incorporated into the
design and facilitation of online courses delivered at scale.

CCS CONCEPTS
•Applied computing ? E-learning;

KEYWORDS
Learning analytics, MOOCs, Help-seeking, Learning design
ACM Reference format:
Linda Corrin, Paula G. de Barba, and Aneesha Bakharia. 2016. Using
learning analytics to explore help-seeking learner pro?les in MOOCs. In
Proceedings of LAK ’17, Vancouver, BC, Canada, March 13-17, 2017, 5 pages.
DOI: h?p://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027448

1 INTRODUCTION
In online learning environments, learners are required to adopt a
high level of autonomy to successfully complete their studies. In
order to ensure that the design of online courses provides appropri-
ate support for learners in such autonomous se?ings it is necessary
to understand how and when learners seek help for their learning.
?e ability to seek help to resolve confusion and misunderstanding
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for pro?t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ?rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permi?ed. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci?c permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
LAK ’17, Vancouver, BC, Canada
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03. . .$$15.00
DOI: h?p://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027448

is especially important in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs)
where learners’ access to teachers is limited due to the large number
of learners and course activity. At the same time, many MOOCs
provide opportunities for learners to seek help from their peers
through tools such as discussion forums. What is still unclear is
the extent to which this is taken up by learners for the purpose
of ge?ing help, and how this relates to other activities learners
can undertake to get support for their learning. While learning
analytics have been used extensively to explore learner behaviour
pa?erns in MOOCs in relation to student performance and per-
sistence, fewer studies have focused speci?cally on the activities
learners undertake in relation to the self-regulatory learning action
of help-seeking.

In this paper we present the initial results of an exploratory study
that uses learning analytics techniques to explore the pro?les of
learners’ help-seeking behaviour in MOOCs. ?is paper makes two
important contributions to the learning analytics literature: ?rstly,
by comparing the pro?les of help-seeking behaviour across multiple
MOOCs with di?erent purposes (e.g., professional development vs.
general interest) and designs; and secondly, by employing analysis
techniques previously rarely used in learning analytics studies (e.g.,
t-sne and A?nity Propagation) for clustering and to enable be?er
interpretation of pro?le groups. ?e outcomes of this study can
help to identify ways that learners’ help-seeking can be supported
and inform future investigation of speci?c elements of help-seeking
behaviours in MOOCs.

2 CONTEXT
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have become ?rmly ce-
mented within the higher education landscape over the past eight
years. ?e popularity of MOOCs, both in terms of learner de-
mand for courses and the increasing involvement of universities in
delivering them, provides opportunities for developing a greater
understanding of how people learn in online environments. ?e
scale of these courses allows unprecedented access to large sets of
data on learner behaviour for researchers to explore educational
issues including engagement [7], performance [6], and retention
[1]. ?e application of learning analytics techniques to these large
data sets o?ers the potential to uncover pa?erns and pro?les of
learner behaviour that can inform be?er learning support, feedback
and course design.

In developing a be?er understanding of learning in online en-
vironments, researchers have used many di?erent theoretical lens
through which to explore this phenomenon. ?e approach adopted
in this study relies on the lens of self-regulated learning. Self-
regulated learners are active learners who plan, monitor, adapt and



LAK ’17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada L. Corrin et. al.

re?ect on their learning experience [16]. ?ey regulate their emo-
tions, cognition, context and behaviour to achieve speci?c learning
goals. Learners who display high levels of self-regulation have
been associated with higher academic performance and persistence
[4][10]. ?e nature of online learning environments o?en requires
greater levels of autonomy from learners than more traditional
se?ings. As a result, learners need to be be?er at self-regulating
their learning to succeed [2].

A key element of self-regulated learning is the help-seeking
behaviours learners adopt to support their learning processes. Help-
seeking is the ability to seek out assistance from peers and teachers
when learners encounter a challenge they ?nd too complex to solve
[12]. Once they have identi?ed the need for assistance, learners
have to decide the best way to seek help in the given context.

?is help-seeking process usually includes eight stages in which
learners: determine whether there is a problem, determine whether
help is needed, decide whether to seek help, decide on the type of
help, decide on whom to ask, solicit help, obtain help, and process
help received [12]. Learners can undertake information searches
by consulting resources, such as a textbook, or have the option of
help-seeking by consulting a human mediator, such as a peer. In
online learning environments the concepts of information search
and help-seeking overlap, as learners have the option to search for
information that has been curated by their peers and teachers [17].

?ere are several ways that learners can seek help within a
MOOC environment. ?e most common is via the discussion forum
where learners can post problems they are encountering to which
peers and/or teachers can reply. ?e active use of discussion forums
in MOOCs has been correlated to higher levels of performance in
MOOCs in some studies (e.g., [19]). In relation to help-seeking be-
haviours, a study by [9] found that clusters of di?erent help-seeking
behaviours had di?erent course completion outcomes, with learn-
ers who engaged primarily with sub-forums dedicated exclusively
to discussion of the ?nal assignment more likely to fail the course.
Other more passive forms of help-seeking behaviour in discussion
forums include viewing and searching for posts on topics of interest.
In addition, learners can seek help by pausing and searching for
speci?c content in the instructional videos of the course.

Tools to support student help-seeking behaviour have been devel-
oped and implemented in MOOCs. For example, the Data, Analytics
and Learning MOOC (DALMOOC) incorporated a ”?ick Helper”
tool designed to actively connect learners together to help to ensure
learners who seek help through discussion forums receive a reply
to their query [18].

Research on help-seeking in MOOCs has, to date, focused on
students’ self-report data to measure how they actively ask other
people for help [11] [13]. Alternatively, the research study pre-
sented in this paper explores learners’ help-seeking behaviours in
MOOCs through the use of learning analytics techniques to create
learner pro?les. Such behaviours include not only asking others for
help, but also indirect help-seeking behaviours, such as searching,
subscribing and viewing forums or pausing and seeking speci?c
locations in video. Recent research indicates the use of learning
analytics (rather than self-report data) is a powerful method to in-
vestigate students’ use of self-regulated learning skills [5]. Recent
research also highlights the need for more studies to explore the
instructional conditions, or learning designs, of online courses in

relation to learner usage pro?les [15] [3]. ?erefore this research
was driven by the following research questions:

(1) What learner pro?les emerge from help-seeking behaviours
displayed in MOOC environments?

(2) What e?ect does the learning design have on di?erent
help-seeking behaviours in MOOCs in relation to learner
performance?

3 METHOD
Four MOOCs were used in the analysis of learners’ help-seeking
behaviour in this study. ?ese MOOCs were all developed by the
University of Melbourne and delivered through the Coursera plat-
form. Two of the MOOCs, Discrete Optimization and Assessment
and Teaching of 21st Century Skills, represent MOOCs with a strong
emphasis on professional development. Alternatively, the two other
courses, ?e French Revolution and Animal Behaviour, were aimed
more at a general interest audience. ?e cohorts of learners in-
cluded in the study were taken from the 2015 o?erings of each
MOOC. ?e main design features of each MOOC are outlined in
Table 1.

?e sample included learners who achieved a grade of more than
4o% for the course. Unlike other studies of engagement pro?les in
MOOCs that include all learners to be able to determine persistence,
this study focused on the behaviour of those learners who partic-
ipated in assessments throughout the course as a way to look at
help-seeking behaviour. ?e sample size of learners for each MOOC
used in the study was: Discrete Optimization (301), Assessment
and teaching of 21st century skills (655), ?e French Revolution
(825), and Animal Behaviour (658).

Data for each of the MOOCs was extracted from the Coursera
course and clickstream databases. A feature matrix was then cre-
ated which included 25 features which could represent help-seeking
behaviours including active forum participation (i.e., the creation
of forum posts, the creation of forum comments, forum thread sub-
scription, forum post up voting, forum post down voting, forum
tag creation and forum reputation points), passive forum partici-
pation (i.e., forum post views, forum comment views and thread
views), assessment (i.e., assignment, quiz and survey a?empts, and
the number of times a quiz result screen was viewed), search (i.e.,
search queries in discussion forums and search queries for over-
all course), video interaction features (i.e., total videos accessed,
number of times the play event was triggered, number of times the
pause event was triggered, number of times the playback speed of a
video was changed, number of times video seeking events were trig-
gered and total video event interactions), total clickstream views,
grade, whether the learner was enrolled in a signature track and
noti?cation subscription (i.e, email announcement subscription).

?e feature matrix was scaled using min-max feature scaling
prior to the performance of dimension reduction using t-distributed
Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) [14]. ?e t-SNE dimension
reduction technique provides a way to embed high-dimensional
data (i.e., the learner feature matrix) into a lower dimensional space
which can then be visualized in a sca?er plot. ?e a?nity propaga-
tion algorithm [8] was then used to ?nd the number of clusters and
simultaneously group similar learners within a cluster. Traditional
clustering algorithms like k-means, require the number of clusters



Using learning analytics to explore help-seeking learner profiles in MOOCs LAK ’17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada

Table 1: Design features of MOOCs

MOOC Description Duration Structure Discussion integration
Animal Behaviour An exploration of how scientists study ani-

mal behaviour and the evolutionary forces
of natural and sexual selection

8 weeks Sequential No direct instruction to ac-
cess the discussion forums,
but forums established for
each week

Assessment and teaching of
21st century skills

An introduction to how 21st century skills
can be taught and assessed in education

6 weeks Sequential Discussion prompts incorpo-
rated into videos

?e French Revolution An examination of the origins, course and
outcomes of the French Revolution

6 weeks Sequential Weekly discussion prompts

Discrete Optimization An introduction to how to solve complex
search problems with discrete optimiza-
tion concepts and algorithms

8 weeks Open No direct instruction to ac-
cess the discussion forums

to be speci?ed as a parameter and additional techniques are re-
quired to help determine the ideal number of clusters that exist in a
dataset. A?nity propagation was used within this study because its
ability to automatically determine the number of clusters is useful
in aiding exploratory data analysis and learner cluster interpreta-
tion. A?nity propagation also returns an exemplar for each cluster
which in the context of this study represented the learner with
the features that are most indicative of the cluster. ?e analysis
of examplar students led to the initial development of the learner
pro?les which were then validated by inspection of other learners
in the cluster and feature statistics for the cluster. ?e resulting 2-D
t-SNE sca?er plot for the French Revolution MOOC is displayed in
Figure 1, with each cluster labeled (and coloured).

Once the clusters had been generated, the learner exemplar and
the cluster statistics (i.e., minimum, maximum and standard devia-
tion for each feature) were analysed. Multiple clusters of MOOC
participants were assigned to a learner pro?le based on forum
activity, assessment performance, search and video interaction.

4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Five learner pro?les were identi?ed using the clusters generated
through the a?nity propagation technique. ?e learner pro?les
and numbers of clusters associated with each pro?le across the four
MOOCs are presented in Table 2.

?e pro?le of low engagement included learners who made very
li?le use of the learning resources and discussion forums in the
course. ?ese learners had low levels of performance on the assess-
ments, but didn’t seem to employ many help-seeking behaviours.
In terms of di?erences across the four MOOCs, the percentage of
students who fell into this category from ?e French Revolution
MOOC was higher than the other three courses. ?is could be at-
tributed to the fact that this MOOC is designed as a general interest
course which may impact the motivation of students to strive for
high levels of engagement and performance.

?e assessment-focused - low grades pro?le group included learn-
ers who had multiple a?empts at the assessment, but still received
lower grades. ?ese learners didn’t make use of the discussion fo-
rum to seek help or watch many videos. Despite receiving feedback
from multiple quizzes a?empts, the performance of these students
remained low. ?e exception in this pro?le group was the Discrete
Optimization course. ?e grading and feedback for the assessment

in this course was automated around an algorithm and this was
explained in detail to the students [20]. ?is awareness of the mean-
ing of the feedback could account for the fact that learners were
able to improve their grades on multiple a?empts.

?e passive engagement learner pro?le group represented the
majority of learners across each of the courses. ?ese learners made
moderate use of resources and forums resulting in a moderate grade
for the course. While their use of the forums was higher than the
two previous learner pro?les, there was still a low level of forum
subscription and search, which represent more speci?c help-seeking
behaviours in this context. An overwhelming majority of learners
in Discrete Optimization fell within this learner pro?le. A large
proportion of 21st Century Skills learners also fell within this pro?le
which could be a?ributed to the fact that use of the discussion
forums was integrated within the instructional videos, prompting
learners to access and engage with the forums.

?e active engagement pro?le includes learners who have high
grades with a moderate number of assessment a?empts. ?ese
students have high levels of engagement with resources and videos,
and participate actively in discussion forums. Like the passive en-
gagement group they engage substantially in the discussion forums,
but don’t make use of the subscription and search functions.

?e assessment-focused - high grades pro?le group had multiple
a?empts at assessments, resulting in higher grades. However, they
did not engage with the discussion forums and made limited use of
resources and videos. Interestingly, this pro?le group was found
to exist in Animal Behaviour and 21st Century Skills, but not in
the other two MOOCs. ?ese learners don’t appear to engage in
many help-seeking behaviours, yet still manage to perform very
well overall. One possible explanation is that these learners have a
high level of prior knowledge that allows them to perform well in
assessments using, almost exclusively, feedback provided through
quizzes to re?ne their knowledge in the context of the course.

?is exploratory analysis has provided insights into the help-
seeking behaviours of groups of students across di?erent MOOCs.
While di?erences in MOOC design can possibly explain some dif-
ferences in the proportions of help-seeking pro?les, further ex-
ploration is needed to understand how these design factors have
impacted learner behaviour in more depth. ?e analysis also un-
covered several interesting observations in relation to help-seeking



LAK ’17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada L. Corrin et. al.

Table 2: Learner pro?les based on help-seeking behaviour

Pro?le Activity Forum Activity Animal Be-
haviour (n
= 658)

21st Cen-
tury Skills
(n = 655)

French Rev-
olution (n =
825)

Discrete
Optimization
(n = 301)

Low engage-
ment

Low grades, low pageviews,
low video interaction, low,
multiple grade a?empts

No forum threads/post reads 19.3% 12.0% 34.6% 14.6%

Assessment-
focused - low
grades

Low grade, high as-
sessment a?empts, low
pageviews, low video
interaction

No forum thread/post reads 15.8% 23.3% 26.6% 0%

Passive
engagement

Medium grade, moderate
pageviews

Low forum thread subscrip-
tion, low forum /course
search, moderate forum
thread/post reads

28.3% 34.6% 24.8% 67.1%

Active en-
gagement

High grades, moderate as-
sessment a?empts, high
pageviews

High forum participation,
low forum thread subscrip-
tion, low forum/course
search

10.7% 10.8% 14.0% 18.3%

Assessment-
focused - high
grades

High grade, high as-
sessment a?empts, low
pageviews, low video
interaction

No forum activity, low
forum thread subscription,
low forum/course search

25.8% 19.0% 0% 0%

activities that could aid students, but are not commonly used, such
as forum subscriptions and search features.

A bene?t of using the a?nity propagation technique over kmeans
to identify the clusters of help-seeking learner behaviours is that
it can generate learner exemplars. Further work on this data set
will look at these exemplars using sequential and temporal analysis
to explore these pro?les in more detail. For example, examining
the sequence of how learners access, pause, replay and seek spe-
ci?c locations in videos, which has been associated with achieving
be?er grades. It is expected that focusing on these more speci?c
actions can help to inform the development of more targeted sup-
port strategies and tools for learner help-seeking. ?e in?uence
of learner demographics within each pro?le is another avenue of
further research we plan to pursue.

5 CONCLUSION
?is initial exploratory study has identi?ed several interesting
trends around the help-seeking behaviours of learners in MOOCs.
Key help-seeking mechanisms within MOOC environments, such
as discussion forums, still have low levels of engagement, with ac-
tions such as search and subscription remaining very low. However,
it was clear that engagement with the discussion forums, whether
active or passive, generally resulted in higher performance in the
MOOCs overall. ?e fact that many students are either not or only
passively engaging with discussion forums indicates that design-
ers of MOOCs need to explore other ways that support can be
provided to learners. It was also important to note the impact of
di?erent learning designs in the distribution of help-seeking pro-
?les across the di?erent MOOCs. For example, clearer explanations
of assessment evaluation design (e.g., Discrete Optimization) and
stronger integration of discussion tools into content delivery (21st

Figure 1: Learner clusters found by the A?nity Propogation
algorithm for the French Revolution MOOC.

Century Skills) resulted in di?erent pa?erns of behaviour in relation
to activities that could be viewed as help-seeking.

Developing be?er strategies to assist learners with help-seeking
in MOOCs is especially important in an environment where several
MOOC providers are transitioning from cohort-based, timed deliv-
ery of courses to on-demand courses that learners can take when
they want and work through at their own pace. ?is change to how
and when learners commence and progress through the course has



Using learning analytics to explore help-seeking learner profiles in MOOCs LAK ’17, March 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada

implications for the ways that help can be sourced from peers. So
if this contributes to the reduction in use or even disappearance
of discussion forums as a key element of MOOCs, as predicted by
some, what does this mean for help-seeking behaviour in MOOC
environments?

?ese and many other questions about how help-seeking can
be fostered and supported in MOOC environments remain. ?is
short paper has presented the ?rst steps in the context of a broader
study of how learners seek support for their learning. ?e use of
learning analytics o?ers potential to explore this phenomenon in
new and di?erent ways. ?e methods adopted in this study have
helped to gain a high-level view of the pa?erns of help-seeking
behaviour across a number of MOOC designs. Further research
is needed to explore some of these speci?c behaviours within the
MOOC context in more detail, including the use of sequential and
temporal techniques. In working to build and re?ne these help-
seeking learner pro?les, it is also important to supplement the
?ndings derived from learning analytics techniques, such as the
ones used here, with re?ections from learners about their help-
seeking approaches. ?is will enable us to identify the strategies
learners adopt to seek help that may fall between the gaps of tracked
log events in MOOCs [21]. ?ese insights can then be used to inform
strategies for the development of tools and resources to provide
greater assistance and support to learners, regardless of the scale
of the online learning environment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
?e authors would like to acknowledge the support of the coordina-
tors of the MOOCs included in this study: Professor Peter McPhee,
Professor Raoul Mulder, Professor Patrick Gri?n and Professor
Pascal Van Hentenryck. A Special Research Initiative of the Aus-
tralian Research Council supported this research: ARC-SRI Science
of Learning Research Centre (project number SRI20300015).

REFERENCES
[1] Khaled M Alraimi, Hangjung Zo, and Andrew P Ciganek. 2015. Understanding

the MOOCs continuance: ?e role of openness and reputation. Computers &
Education 80 (2015), 28–38.

[2] Anthony R Artino. 2007. Self-regulated learning in online education: A review
of the empirical literature. International Journal of Instructional Technology and
Distance Learning 4, 6 (2007), 3–18.

[3] Aneesha Bakharia, Linda Corrin, Paula de Barba, Gregor Kennedy, Dragan
Gas?evic?, Raoul Mulder, David Williams, Shane Dawson, and Lori Lockyer. 2016.
A conceptual framework linking learning design with learning analytics. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge.
ACM, 329–338.

[4] J Broadbent and WL Poon. 2015. Self-regulated learning strategies & academic
achievement in online higher education learning environments: A systematic
review. ?e Internet and Higher Education 27 (2015), 1–13.

[5] Moon-Heum Cho and Jin Soung Yoo. 2016. Exploring online students’ self-
regulated learning with self-reported surveys and log ?les: a data mining ap-
proach. Interactive Learning Environments (2016), 1–13.

[6] Carleton Co?rin, Linda Corrin, Paula de Barba, and Gregor Kennedy. 2014. Visual-
izing pa?erns of student engagement and performance in MOOCs. In Proceedings
of the fourth international conference on learning analytics and knowledge. ACM,
83–92.

[7] Rebecca Ferguson and Doug Clow. 2015. Examining engagement: analysing
learner subpopulations in massive open online courses (MOOCs). In Proceedings
of the Fi?h International Conference on Learning Analytics And Knowledge. ACM,
51–58.

[8] Brendan J Frey and Delbert Dueck. 2007. Clustering by passing messages between
data points. science 315, 5814 (2007), 972–976.

[9] Nabeel Gillani, Rebecca Eynon, Michael Osborne, Isis Hjorth, and Stephen
Roberts. 2014. Communication communities in MOOCs. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1403.4640 (2014).
[10] Carolyn Hart. 2012. Factors associated with student persistence in an online

program of study: A review of the literature. Journal of Interactive Online
Learning 11, 1 (2012), 19–42.

[11] Nina Hood, Allison Li?lejohn, and Colin Milligan. 2015. Context counts: How
learners’ contexts in?uence learning in a MOOC. Computers & Education 91
(2015), 83–91.

[12] Stuart A Karabenick and Myron H Dembo. 2011. Understanding and facilitating
self-regulated help seeking. New Directions for Teaching and Learning 2011, 126
(2011), 33–43.

[13] Rene? F Kizilcec, Mar Pe?rez-Sanagust??n, and Jorge J Maldonado. 2017. Self-
regulated learning strategies predict learner behavior and goal a?ainment in
Massive Open Online Courses. Computers & Education 104 (2017), 18–33.

[14] Laurens van der Maaten and Geo?rey Hinton. 2008. Visualizing data using t-SNE.
Journal of Machine Learning Research 9, Nov (2008), 2579–2605.

[15] Negin Mirriahi, Daniyal Liaqat, Shane Dawson, and Dragan Gas?evic?. 2016. Uncov-
ering student learning pro?les with a video annotation tool: re?ective learning
with and without instructional norms. Educational Technology Research and
Development 64, 6 (2016), 1083–1106.

[16] Paul R Pintrich. 2000. ?e role of goal orientation in self-regulated learning.
Academic Press.

[17] Minna Puustinen and Jean-Franc?ois Rouet. 2009. Learning with new technologies:
Help seeking and information searching revisited. Computers & Education 53, 4
(2009), 1014–1019.

[18] Carolyn Penstein Rose?, Oliver Ferschke, Gaurav Tomar, Diyi Yang, Iris Howley,
Vincent Aleven, George Siemens, Ma?hew Crosslin, Dragan Gasevic, and Ryan
Baker. 2015. Challenges and opportunities of dual-layer MOOCs: Re?ections
from an edX deployment study. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2015), Vol. 15. 848–851.

[19] Shu-Fen Tseng, Yen-Wei Tsao, Liang-Chih Yu, Chien-Lung Chan, and K Robert
Lai. 2016. Who will pass? Analyzing learner behaviors in MOOCs. Research and
Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning 11, 1 (2016), 8.

[20] Pascal Van Hentenryck and Carleton Co?rin. 2014. Teaching creative problem
solving in a MOOC. In Proceedings of the 45th ACM technical symposium on
Computer science education. ACM, 677–682.

[21] George Veletsianos, Justin Reich, and Laura A Pasquini. 2016. ?e Life Between
Big Data Log Events” Learners’ Strategies to Overcome Challenges in MOOCs.
AERA Open 2, 3 (2016), 1–10.


	Abstract
	1 Introduction
	2 Context
	3 Method
	4 Results and Discussion
	5 Conclusion
	Acknowledgments
	References


