
Expanding the Scope of Learning Analytics Data: 
Preliminary Findings on Attention and Self-Regulation 

using Wearable Technology 
 

Catherine A. Spann 
University of Texas at Arlington 

Learning Innovation and Networked 
Knowledge (LINK) Research Lab 

caspann@uta.edu 

James Schaeffer 
University of Texas at Arlington 

Learning Innovation and Networked 
Knowledge (LINK) Research Lab 

Department of Psychology 
james.schaeffer@mavs.uta.edu 

George Siemens 
University of Texas at Arlington 

Learning Innovation and Networked 
Knowledge (LINK) Research Lab 

gsiemens@gmail.com 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
The ability to pay attention and self-regulate is a fundamental skill 
required of learners of all ages. Learning analytics researchers 
have to date relied on data generated by a computing system (such 
as a learning management system, click stream or log data) to 
examine learners’ self-regulatory abilities. The development of 
wearable computing through fitness trackers, watches, heart rate 
monitors, and clinical grade devices such as Empatica’s E4 
wristband now provides researchers with access to biometric data 
as students interact with learning content or software systems. 
This level of data collection promises to provide valuable insight 
into cognitive and affective experiences of individuals, especially 
when combined with traditional learning analytics data sources. 
Our study details the use of wearable technologies to assess the 
relationship between heart rate variability and the self-regulatory 
abilities of an individual. This is relevant for the field of learning 
analytics as methods become more complex and the assessment of 
learner performance becomes more nuanced and attentive to the 
affective factors that contribute to learner success. 

CCS Concepts 
• HCI Theory, Concepts and Models 

Keywords 
Attention; self-regulation; heart-rate variability; 
psychophysiology; wearable technology. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
A comprehensive assessment of a learner should account for the 
many contributions of cognitive, affective, and behavioral factors. 
Broadening data collection in the field of learning analytics [13] is 
required in order to provide insight into how individuals function 
in a complex and changing world. Snapshots of learner behavior 
generated from learning management systems, click stream data,  

and self-report provide data that lacks depth and generally limited 
to one point in time. Wearable technologies, defined as a device 
worn on the body that incorporates wireless connectivity for the 
purposes of accessing, interacting with, and exchanging 
contextually relevant information [4], offer a new mode of data 
collection for learning analytics researchers. Expected to reach 
over four billion dollars in revenue in 2017 [7], wearable devices 
come in a variety of forms, including smart watches, glasses, and 
smart jewelry, which produce a wealth of data. The benefits of 
this technology to teaching and learning is only beginning to be 
explored. 

Existing research in learning analytics has emphasized the 
importance of self-regulation for effective learning [12]. An 
emerging area of interest in learning analytics involves the 
physiological component of human learning and self-regulation. It 
is clear that learners must have both the cognitive and 
physiological flexibility to face changing environmental demands. 
An under-regulated autonomic nervous system can mean that 
learners are at the whim of their surroundings, unable to regulate 
their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Wearable technologies can 
capture autonomic nervous system activity.  

Wearable technology can provide psychophysiological data that 
have until recently been prohibitively challenging to collect. 
Psychophysiology concerns embodied intelligence—the idea that 
through sensations that arise within the body itself, we learn and 
organize our experiences. The developments of ambulatory 
recording devices and mobile computing make it possible to now 
measure psychophysiological phenomena in naturalistic settings. 

This paper explores how an individual’s ability to pay attention 
and self-regulate can be assessed through wearable technologies 
that collect psychophysiological data. This work is important to 
the learning analytics field in providing a) broadened data 
collection capabilities beyond log files and click streams, b) 
assessing psychophysiological factors that influence learner self-
regulatory abilities, and c) providing a foundation for future 
research around affect and self-regulation through wearable 
devices.  

1.1 Attention and Self-Regulation 
The ability to control one’s attention, thoughts, emotions, and 
behaviors is essential for a healthy and successful life [10]. 
Attentional control and the ability to inhibit inappropriate or 
maladaptive behavior is critical for learning. Attention and self-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions 
from Permissions@acm.org. 
LAK ’17, Month 13-17, 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4870-6/17/03?$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027427 



regulation is related to numerous outcomes including academic 
success [3], better mental and physical health [10], success in the 
workplace [5], and healthier and more positive social relationships 
[1]. A longitudinal study of over 1,000 individuals spanning 32 
years found that, after controlling for socioeconomic status and 
intelligence, childhood self-regulation predicted better health, less 
criminal behavior, and greater wealth in adulthood [10]. Failures 
of attentional control and self-regulation led to a variety of 
negative outcomes including school dropout and violent crime 
[10].  

The opposing construct to paying attention and self-regulating 
one’s behavior is mind-wandering. Mind-wandering occurs when 
attention moves from the immediate external environment to 
internal thoughts. The act of mind wandering is incredibly 
common. One large-scale investigation using experience-sampling 
techniques estimating that we are engaged in mind wandering 
approximately 50% of our waking life [8]. There are many costs 
to mind wandering including reduced working memory [11], 
increased impulsivity [11], impaired reading comprehension [8], 
and negative mood [8]. Certainly, uncontrolled mind wandering 
impairs the learning process and can disrupt performance on a 
number of activities. Thus, the ability for a learner to sustain 
attention on the task at hand and self-regulate their behavior is 
critically important for their success as a student. 

1.2 Heart-Rate Variability 
Attention and self-regulation is closely linked to internal bodily 
states [9], largely because the brain and heart are in constant 
communication. The Neurovisceral Integration Model [15] puts 
forth the idea that cognitive, affective, and physiological 
regulation may be associated with each other to serve the purpose 
of goal-directed behavior. In the context of physiological 
regulation, and specifically the regulation of the heart, a balanced 
system is necessary. The balanced body can respond to physical 
and environmental demands.  
Activities that require cognitive effort are known to influence the 
autonomic nervous system (ANS), which is divided into the 
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and parasympathetic nervous 
system (PNS). While the SNS is devoted to prepare the body for 
engaging with or avoiding an activity, the PNS is concerned with 
slowing down and calming the nervous system. The two 
components of the ANS play antagonistic roles and, through their 
synergy, are responsible for maintaining homeostasis and a 
regulated bodily system. 

Mental effort is associated with physiological arousal and, thus, 
increased SNS activity [15]. Increases in sympathetic activity 
correlates with increases in heart rate while increases in 
parasympathetic activity correlates decreases in heart rate. 
Consequently, SNS increases cause the time between heart beats 
to shorten while PNS increases cause the time between heart beats 
to lengthen. Sympathetic influences are slow, occurring over 
seconds, while the parasympathetic effects are fast, occurring over 
milliseconds.  

Heart-rate variability (HRV) is regularly used as a biomarker of 
the autonomic nervous system. HRV is defined as the variability 
of the beat to beat timing of the heart and the data required for 
calculating HRV is the sequence of time intervals between 
successive heart beats. Because SNS activity occurs over seconds, 
the parasympathetic effects are the only ones that could produce 
rapid changes in the time between heart beats. Thus, the high 
frequency component of HRV, typically measured at .15 to .40 
Hz, reflects the parasympathetic influence on the ANS.  

The parasympathetic nervous system of the ANS is critical for 
regulating the body and plays a role in attention, working 
memory, and emotion regulation [15]. Greater high frequency 
HRV indicates an individual’s ability to maintain homeostasis and 
responsiveness to complex and changing demands. HRV is related 
to physiological, affective, and cognitive processes. Individuals 
with higher resting HRV are better able to perform cognitive and 
behavioral tasks that require attentional control and inhibition 
across a wide-range of situations in the lab and real-world 
situations [15].  

A critical idea is that HRV may provide a marker of the degree to 
which the brain’s integrative system for successful regulation 
provides flexible control over the body [15]. HRV may serve as 
one simply measured output that may provide important 
information regarding the ability of a person to function 
effectively in a complex environment.  

Researchers from diverse fields are studying HRV. With the 
advancement and proliferation of wearable technologies, this 
physiological signal can now be measured in real-time and in real-
world environments. 

1.3 The Current Study 
The present investigation is a report of preliminary findings on the 
relationship between HRV (measured with wearable technology) 
and attention and self-regulation (measured in a real-world 
setting). The study employed a correlational design in which 
individuals at a local museum participated in a twenty-minute 
research study. Our goal was to take psychophysiological 
assessments via wearable technology out of the laboratory and 
into real-world settings. Participants in this study self-reported to 
us their global assessment of their own attention and self-
regulation and they also completed an objective measure of 
attention and self-regulation on an iPad. A wearable wristband 
designed for physiological data collection was worn throughout 
the entire study.  

1.3.1 Hypotheses 
Our first hypothesis was that higher HRV would be associated 
with greater attention and self-regulation. We also expected that 
higher HRV would be related to greater self-reported attention 
and self-regulation.  

2. METHODS 
All study procedures were reviewed and approved by the 
Institutional Review Board at the University of Texas at 
Arlington. 

2.1 Recruitment 
Individuals ages nine and older were recruited from the Forth 
Worth Museum of Science and History, in a partnership with the 
Research and Learning Center located within the museum. Study 
staff approached participants at the museum and asked if they 
would like to participate in a research study on attention and self-
regulation. Participation was voluntary and individuals were not 
compensated for their time. 

2.2 Participants 
The current sample includes 52 participants, 23 of which were 
between the ages of 9 and 17, 15 were between the ages of 18 and 
45, and 14 participants were 46 or older. 



2.3 Measures 
2.3.1 Attention and Self-Regulation 
The Dimensional Change Card Sort (DCCS) is the most widely 
used measure of executive cognitive control, tapping into 
attentional control, inhibitory control, and cognitive flexibility. 
The DCCS is part of the National Institutes of Health Toolbox 
Cognition Battery. The DCCS is a five-minute computerized task 
in which two presented target pictures vary along two dimensions 
(shape and color; Figure 1). Participants are asked to match a 
series of test pictures (bunny and sailboat) to the target pictures, 
first according to one dimension (shape) and then according to 
another dimension (color). Switch trials are employed, where the 
participant must change the dimension being matched. For 
example, after four consecutive trials matching on shape, the 
participant may be asked to match on color during the next trial 
and then return back to shape. This requires attentional and 
behavioral control to quickly choose the correct stimulus. This 
task was administered on an iPad. The participant is instructed to 
answer as quickly as possible and to try not to make any mistakes. 

 
Figure 1. Sequence of trials for the National Institutes of 

Health (NIH) Toolbox Dimensional Change Card Sort Test. © 
2006-2012 National Institutes of Health and Northwestern 

University. 
Scoring of the DCCS is based on a combination of accuracy and 
reaction time. Higher scores indicate better performance. A two-
vector scoring method is employed, where the vectors range from 
0 to 5. This forms a computed score ranging from 0 to 10. For any 
given participant, accuracy is considered first, and if accuracy 
levels are less than or equal to 80%, the final computed score is 
equal to the accuracy score. If accuracy levels for the participant 
reached more than 80%, the reaction time score and accuracy 
score are combined. 

The accuracy vector was comprised of accuracy points. For every 
correct behavioral response, a participant received a value of 
0.167 (5 points divided by 30 trials). Thus, DCCS Accuracy Score 
= (0.167 * Number of Correct Responses). 
 
The reaction time vector was generated from the median reaction 
time score on switch trials (non-dominant dimension/dimension 
cued less frequently). Median reaction time values were computed 
using only correct trials with reaction times greater than or equal 
to 100ms and reaction times no larger than 3 standard deviations 
away from the child’s mean reaction time for switch trials. 
Because reaction time data tends to have a positively skewed 
distribution, a log (Base 10) transformation was applied to each 
child’s median reaction time score. Participants with median 
reaction times that fell outside of the validated minimum (500ms) 

and maximum (3,000ms) reaction time, but within the allowable 
range (100ms-10,000ms) were truncated (i.e., reaction times 
between 3,000ms and 10,000ms were set to 3,000ms). Log values 
were then algebraically rescaled from a log(500)-log(3000) range 
to a 0-5 range using the following formula: 

 
DCCS Reaction Time Score = 5 ?	 5 ? %&'()*%&'	(,--)

%&' /--- *%&'	(,--)
 

 
Again, these reaction time scores were combined with the 
accuracy scores for children who achieved the accuracy criterion 
of greater than 80%. Children who failed to reach the criterion 
received their accuracy score as their total computed score. 
 
2.3.2 Heart-Rate Variability 
HRV was taken through a wearable Empatica E4 wristband 
(Figure 2, https://www.empatica.com/e4-wristband). The E4 is 
worn on the wrist and collects data from the surface of the skin. 
The wristband contains a photoplethysmography (PPG) sensor, 
which measures blood volume pulse. Heart rate and HRV were 
derived from blood volume pulse.  

 
Figure 2. Empatica E4 Wristband worn on the non-dominant 

wrist during 20-minute experiment.  
https://www.empatica.com/e4-wristband 

Heart rate data collected during the three-minute baseline period 
was processed using Kubios software [11]. The digital signal 
underwent a fast Fourier transform to extract the high frequency 
component (0.15 to 0.40 Hz) of HRV from the inter-beat interval 
data. A low-level artifact correction was used to account for 
missing data, where intervals differing more than 0.35s of the 
local average were determine to be artifacts and interpolated. 
Power values (ms2) were transformed with a natural logarithm to 
remove a positive skew. 

2.3.3 Self-Reported Attention and Self-Regulation 
Three questionnaires were administered depending on the 
participant’s age. For adolescents aged 9-15, the Early Adolescent 
Temperament Questionnaire was used. They responded to eleven 
items, where six items assessed their attentional control and five 
items assessed their self-regulation. Internal consistency 
reliabilities for attentional control and self-regulation were .39 and 
.41, respectively. For individuals age 16 and older, they 
completed the Adult Temperament Questionnaire. Five items 
assessed their attentional control and 7 items assessed their self-
regulation. Internal consistency reliabilities for attentional control 
and self-regulation were .53 and .40, respectively. 

2.4 Procedure 
Data collection occurred at the Research and Learning Center at 
the Fort Worth Museum of Science and History. First, participants 
were provided the informed consent. Parental approval was 



provided for all individuals under the age of 18. After providing 
consent, the E4 wristband was placed on the participant’s non-
dominant wrist. Individuals then completed the demographic 
questionnaire where they reported gender, birthdate, race, and 
ethnicity. Participants then completed the self-report questionnaire 
on their attention and self-regulation. 
Following this, the experimenter informed the participant that 
they would collect baseline assessments of the physiological 
measurements while they were at rest. They were asked to place 
noise-cancelling headphones on, sit in an upright and relaxed 
posture, close their eyes. Nature sounds were played through the 
headphones for three minutes while the participant relaxed.  

After the baseline procedures, participants completed the DCCS 
on the iPad. This lasted approximately four minutes. The entire 
procedure took between fifteen and twenty minutes to complete. 

2.5 Statistical Analyses 
Using an a priori power analysis assuming a small to moderate 
effect size of .06, an alpha of .05, and power of .80, a sample size 
of 133 is required. The present results are preliminary findings 
from this proposed sample.  
Prior to formal hypothesis testing, data were screened for outliers 
and skewness to ensure that all assumptions were met for 
subsequent analyses. The sample was parsed into three age 
categories: 9-17, 18-45, 46 and older. Bivariate relationships and 
gender differences were examined with Pearson’s R correlations 
and independent samples t-tests. 

3. RESULTS 
3.1 Descriptive Statistics 
Table 1 provides mean and standard deviations for the primary 
variables of interest. HF-HRV refers to the high frequency 
component of HRV, or the parasympathetic influence on 
autonomic activity. DCCS refers to participant scores on the 
cognitive task requiring attention and self-regulation. The 
columns for attention and self-regulation refer to the self-reported 
attention and self-regulation scores. Scores for these two variables 
were standardized within each age group. Higher scores reflect 
better self-reported attention and self-regulation.  

Table 1. Means and standard deviations for study measures 

 

3.2 Gender Differences 
Using independent samples t-tests, no gender differences were 
found across all objective and self-reported measures from any 
age group. 

3.3 Correlational Analyses 
Correlations among all variables are presented in Table 2. Results 
partially supported our first hypothesis, which predicted that HF-
HRV would be significantly positively related to DCCS scores. 

This was only apparent among adolescents. The relationship 
between HF-HRV and DCCS scores attenuated among older 
individuals and reversed among the oldest participants. That is, 
there was an inverse relationship between HF-HRV and DCCS 
scores among those 46 years of age and older. This relationship, 
however, was not significant. 
Results did not support our second hypothesis, which predicted 
that HF-HRV would be significantly positively related to self- 
reported attention and self-regulatory abilities. There was a 
relationship found between HF-HRV and self-reported attention 
in older adults, but this relationship did not reach significance. 

Table 2. Correlations among variables 

Note. *significant at p < .05. 

4. DISCUSSION 
This study examined the relationship between autonomic nervous 
system activity and behavioral and self-reports of attention and 
self-regulation. We used wrist worn wearable technology to 
collect psychophysiological data in a real-world learning 
environment. Preliminary findings from this study indicated that 
higher HRV is associated with an objective measure of attention 
and self-regulation among adolescents.  
The small sample significantly limits any strong conclusions at 
this time. The internal consistency of the questionnaires was poor, 
and significant conclusions should not be made with the current 
findings related to self-reported attention and self-regulation. 
However, the current results are promising in that the biological 
indicator of HRV assessed with wearable technology was 
significantly associated with an objective measure of attention and 
self-regulation. 

4.1 Future Directions 
Data collection will continue on this project. This work will also 
extend into other physiological indicators of autonomic activity 
taken during this study, including heart rate and galvanic skin 
response. Our research will extend to longer term, continuous data 
collection in real-world settings along with a focus on intervention 
work. Previous research has suggested that moderate practice in 
meditation and deep reflection increases HRV [9] and one’s 
ability to pay attention, self-regulate, and control mind wandering 
[11]. Wearable and mobile technology now enables us to monitor 
HRV and self-regulatory abilities over longer time periods in a 

		
HF-HRV	 DCCS	 Attention	 Self-Regulation	

Ages	
9-17	

7.18	
(0.65)	

123.73	
(23.67)	

-0.76	
(1.06)	

-0.09	
(.98)	

Ages	
18-45	

6.22	
(1.06)	

112.38	
(17.61)	

-0.10	
(1.03)	

0.11	
(0.95)	

Ages	
46+	

5.64	
(0.87)	

125.64	
(20.93)	

0.25	
(0.82)	

0.03	
(1.12)	

		 HRV	 DCCS	 Attention	 Self-Control	

9-
17

	y
rs
.	

Age	 .25	 .26	 -.12	 -.13	

HRV	
	

			.48*	 -.23	 -.29	

DCCS	
	  

-.21	 -.30	

Attention	       	.42	

18
-4
6	
yr
s.
	 Age	 -.67*	 -.18	 -.29	 -.16	

HRV	
	

	.11	 	.38	 	.16	

DCCS	
	  

	.46	 			.75*	

Attention	       			.54*	
46

+	
yr
s.
	 Age	 -.30	 	.30	 -.23	 	.22	

HRV	
	

-.27	 	.57	 	-.001	

DCCS	
	  

	.27	 			.60*	

Attention	       	.33	



variety of settings. These technologies will also increase 
understanding of the boundary conditions under which the 
influence of autonomic nervous system activity on behavior 
fluctuates. 

4.2 Conclusion 
This study introduces a promising area of research for the field of 
learning analytics: psychophysiological measures through use of 
wearable technologies. As learning analytics continues to evolve 
as a bricolage field [6] that draws from numerous disciplines in 
maturing analysis techniques, researchers can benefit from 
evaluating the physiological conditions that underpin self-
regulation, motivation, and related attributes. In our study, we 
detail preliminary results of HRV and self-regulation - research 
that is relevant to learning designers, software programmers, and 
educators. By recognizing the contribution of physiological states 
to cognitive and learning performance, LA as a field will be better 
able to guide system designers in creating nudging mechanisms, 
assess the impact of learning activity design on self-regulation, 
and provide direction on scaffolding and support needed for 
learners whose self-regulatory capabilities are not sufficiently 
developed to enable mastery of complex learning material.  
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thank you to the Research and Learning Center at the Fort Worth 
Museum of Science and History for partnering with us on this 
project and to the families who participated in this research. 

6. REFERENCES 
[1] Ayduk, O., Mendoza-Denton, R., Mischel, W., Downey, G., 

Peake, P.K. and Rodriguez, M. 2000. Regulating the 
interpersonal self: Strategic self-regulation for coping with 
rejection sensitivity. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology. 79, 5 (2000), 776–792. 

[2] Bailey, C.E. 2007. Cognitive Accuracy and Intelligent 
Executive Function in the Brain and in Business. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences. 1118, 1 (Sep. 2007), 
122–141. 

[3] Blair, C. and Razza, R.P. 2007. Relating effortful control, 
executive function, and false belief understanding to 
emerging math and literacy ability in kindergarten. Child 
development. 78, 2 (2007), 647–663. 

[4] Bower, M. and Sturman, D. 2015. What are the educational 
affordances of wearable technologies? Computers & 
Education. 88, (Oct. 2015), 343–353. 

[5] Critchley, H.D. and Harrison, N.A. 2013. Visceral Influences 
on Brain and Behavior. Neuron. 77, 4 (Feb. 2013), 624–
638. 

[6] Gaševi?, D., Dawson, S. and Siemens, G. 2015. Let’s not 
forget: Learning analytics are about learning. TechTrends. 
59, 1 (2015), 64–71. 

[7] Global wearable technology market 2012-2018 | Statistic: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/302482/wearable-
device-market-value/. Accessed: 2017-01-07. 

[8] Killingsworth, M.A. and Gilbert, D.T. 2010. A Wandering 
Mind Is an Unhappy Mind. Science. 330, 6006 (Nov. 
2010), 932–932. 

[9] Lumma, A.-L., Kok, B.E. and Singer, T. 2015. Is meditation 
always relaxing? Investigating heart rate, heart rate 
variability, experienced effort and likeability during 
training of three types of meditation. International Journal 
of Psychophysiology. 97, 1 (Jul. 2015), 38–45. 

[10] Moffitt, T.E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., 
Hancox, R.J., Harrington, H., Houts, R., Poulton, R., 
Roberts, B.W., Ross, S., Sears, M.R., Thomson, W.M. and 
Caspi, A. 2011. A gradient of childhood self-control 
predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences. 108, 7 (Feb. 2011), 
2693–2698. 

[11] Mrazek, M.D., Franklin, M.S., Phillips, D.T., Baird, B. and 
Schooler, J.W. 2013. Mindfulness Training Improves 
Working Memory Capacity and GRE Performance While 
Reducing Mind Wandering. Psychological Science. 24, 5 
(May 2013), 776–781. 

[12] Roll, I. and Winne, P.H. 2015. Understanding, evaluating, 
and supporting self-regulated learning using learning 
analytics. test. 2, 1 (2015), 7–12. 

[13] Siemens, G. 2012. Learning analytics: envisioning a research 
discipline and a domain of practice. Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Conference on Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge (2012), 4–8. 

[14] Tarvainen, M.P., Niskanen, J.-P., Lipponen, J.A., Ranta-aho, 
P.O. and Karjalainen, P.A. 2014. Kubios HRV – Heart rate 
variability analysis software. Computer Methods and 
Programs in Biomedicine. 113, 1 (Jan. 2014), 210–220. 

[15] Thayer, J.F., Hansen, A.L., Saus-Rose, E. and Johnsen, B.H. 
2009. Heart Rate Variability, Prefrontal Neural Function, 
and Cognitive Performance: The Neurovisceral Integration 
Perspective on Self-regulation, Adaptation, and Health. 
Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 37, 2 (Apr. 2009), 141–
153. 

 
 

 



