Learning Networks, Crowds and Communities  Caroline Haythornthwaite   School of Library, Archival and Information Studies,   University of British Columbia   Irving K. Barber Learning Centre   Suite 470- 1961 East Mall   Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1    011-1-604-837-4790   c.haythorn@ubc.ca    ABSTRACT  Who we learn from, where and when is dramatically affected by  the reach of the Internet. From learning for formal education to  learning for pleasure, we look to the web early and often for our  data and knowledge needs, but also for places and spaces where  we can collaborate, contribute to, and create learning and  knowledge communities. Based on the keynote presentation given  at the first Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference held in  2011 in Banff, Alberta, this paper explores a social network  perspective on learning with reference to social network principles  and studies by the author. The paper explores the ways a social  network perspective can be used to examine learning, with  attention to the structure and dynamics of online learning  networks, and emerging configurations such as online crowds and  communities.     Categories and Subject Descriptors  K.3.1 [Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in Education   General Terms  Management, Measurement, Design, Human Factors.   Keywords  Learning analytics, social networks, online learning, education.   1. INTRODUCTION We hear a lot about networks these days, from large scale maps of  the internet to social networking sites. There are knowledge  networks and social networks, political networks and  transportation networks, information exchange networks,  recommender networks and communication networks. There are  also webs  the web of science, food webs, and, of course, the  world wide web. Networks have great appeal in part because of  the visualizations that bring them to life and make visible the  invisible structures of human interaction   see, for example, Trier 2007, Lim forthcoming and  http://www.visualcomplexity.com/vc/.  In my research, I have been examining online interaction from a  social network perspective, addressing questions such as: How do  people work, learn and socialize together at a distance and   through computer media How do social network patterns of  interaction support information and knowledge sharing In  particular, a number of my studies have been based on examining  who talks to whom about what and via which media e.g.,  Haythornthwaite, 2002a, 2008. A number of these studies have  addressed online learning environments, for example, examining  in-class personal networks of students for their composition and  extent, how community is perceived and supported among online  learners, and how class requirements e.g., group projects affect  who talks to whom and the ramifications of this for network  structures.   This research provides the background for my orientation to  learning analytics. The social network perspective provides a  strong suite of social theory and analytic techniques that can  illuminate interaction processes and be particularly useful for  proactive and responsive teaching, learning, and education. While  we are at the very beginning of researching and understanding  learning networks, we have the opportunity to start from the  wealth of study done on social networks. This paper provides  background on my own studies of learning environments and  networks, and also describes social network research that provides  a groundwork for learning analytics in terms of both graph theory  and studies of social behavior. The kinds of questions we now  face include: How can networks can be used to examine learning  and education processes What needs to be done to build a  network analytic base for learning How can what is known in  social network research be used to jumpstart learning networks  research  The following discusses a social network analytic view of  learning, connecting this to aspects of learning and networks that  lend themselves to a research agenda for learning analytics.    1.1 Brief Introduction to Social Networks  Currently, the idea of social networks has permeated discussions  of online interaction, in part because of the adoption of  technologies known as social networking sites.  However, the  attention here is not on the phenomenon of social networking, but  on social network analysis SNA, a perspective, method, set of  techniques and vocabulary that can be applied to the study of  social phenomena, and in particular social relationships and  structures. A primary characteristic of social network analysis is  its emphasis on relational properties rather than aggregate  behavior. Relations are the interaction, transaction,  communication, or collaboration that ties two or more actors in a  network. Relations can be distinguished on characteristics such as  content, direction, and strength, e.g., in the difference between  conveying instructions, providing material vs. social support, or  collaborating in a formal partnership. Actors tied by these  relations may be individuals, groups or teams, centers,  organizations, countries, etc. The ties that result from the   Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that  copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy  otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  LAK11, February  27March 1, 2011, Banff, Alberta, Canada.  Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-1057-4/11/02$10.00.      18    maintenance of relations may be distinguished by the set of  relations maintained in composition, multiplexity, importance,  etc., and in the way the relations are maintained, e.g., through  different media, with different frequency, intensity or intimacy.  Networks result from these kinds of direct interactions, but they  can also be inferred from indirect interaction. Thus, networks can  be demonstrated based on who interacts with whom, but also  around co-attendance or co-participation in events, e.g., as people  who have attended the same lecture, whether they met each other  or not, are tied through common experience, exposure to  information, or interest.    Networks are evident in many of our daily activities, and with  increasing frequency are easily visualized and seen in online  displays, particularly for internet-based phenomena. For example,  we can: see visualizations of twitter interactions  http://networkweaver.blogspot.com/2011_02_01_archive.html;  use ToughGraphs to look at internet linkages or book buying on  Amazon http://www.touchgraph.com/; look at linkages in  resource searching that creates a map of knowledge Bollen et al,  2009  Network analysis software is becoming increasingly available and  easier to use e.g., see lists on the   International Network of Social Network Analysts INSNA site:  http://www.insna.org/software/index.html, and is also being  integrated into analysis and presentation in learning environments  e.g., see the Social Networks Adapting Pedagogical Practice  SNAPP tool, Bakharia & Dawson, 2011, and  http://research.uow.edu.au/learningnetworks/seeing/snapp/index.h tml.  These developments create a readiness for production and  presentation of network results, increasing general understanding  of these kinds of results and perhaps also expectations around  their presentation. Thus, the time is appropriate to include  network analyses, results and displays into learning environments,  and to gain a greater understanding of how particular network  configurations correspond to different kinds of learning outcomes.   2. SOCIAL NETWORK RESEARCH  A lot of research has been done on social networks e.g., for recent  reviews and compilations, see Borgatti, Mehra, Brass & Labianca,  2009; Scott & Carrington, 2010; see also Wasserman & Faust,  1994; Carrington, Scott & Wasserman, 2005, with recent attention  appearing in relation to education and learning e.g., Daly, 2010;  Haythornthwaite & de Laat, in press. While a review is beyond  the scope of this paper, the following highlights some key areas  that relate to learning.   2.1 Knowledge Dissemination   From diffusion of innovation to trust in information sources, an  underlying theme in knowledge dissemination is the role of  different kinds of people in the adoption and uptake of new  information. Studies have repeatedly shown that a core of people  similar to us are important in our adoption of new practices, i.e.,  in the demonstration of new behavior that suggests learning has  happened. Whether of ideas or technologies, testimony of trusted  others and evidence in local practice makes a difference in what  we follow and incorporate in our own practices. The people we  most follow are those with whom we maintain strong ties, i.e., ties  that are sustained through a base of multiple relations and multiple  media, with frequent interaction, shared experience, mutual  interest, reciprocity in exchanges and self-disclosure. These  people are similar to us, travel in the same social circles, and are  exposed to similar information. This similarity facilitates   exchanges among us as we use the same language or short-hands  for communication that reduce the work we need to do to convey  information Clark & Brennan, 1991. We know more about each  other and this transactive memory helps us distinguish who  knows what across our network Hollingshead, Fulk & Monge,  2002; Wegner, 1987.   By contrast, those with whom we share weak ties, i.e., ties based  on fewer, more instrumental relations, with less frequent  interaction via fewer media, are more different from us. We know  less about them, trust their information less, and are less likely to  take up their ideas or innovations. This difference is, however, the  strength of weak ties Granovetter, 1973. Because they come from  different social circles, they are aware of and able to convey  information that is different from what is known among our strong  ties. While their ability to influence adoption may be low, weak  ties are important for creating awareness of new opportunities,  and bridging between social networks Putnam, 2000; Lin, 2008.  In the computing field, much effort has gone into describing and  designing for tightly connected working relationships associated  with strong ties. Areas such as computer-supported cooperative  work CSCW have detailed the tasks worked on by distributed  pairs in order to enhance systems that support such ties. Studies of  workplaces e.g., Engestrm & Middleton, 1996; Luff, Hindmarsh  & Heath, 2000 have been important in describing the details of  work life as a way of articulating close work tie relations.  Similarly, concerns about computer-mediated communication and  virtual communities have focused on how strong tie connections  are affected, creating social and technical design initiatives to  increase presence and the feeling of being there and/or of  being there with others. Along a similar line, research on trust  also explores the development of strong ties and/or strong-tie like  relationships e.g., brand loyalty and how this affects information  sharing in organizations, and engagement in online activities such  as e-commerce.   In the learning area, ideas of collaborative learning have  emphasized the importance of hearing from different others,  pooling and sharing different opinions as a way of enlarging the  educational and learning experienced Bruffee, 1993, i.e, in paying  attention to the role of weak ties. Yet, even in collaborative  learning environments, requirements for group projects often  bring the learner back to the need to achieve a close working tie  with others. Thus, from a network perspective, an argument can  be made for attention to both strong and weak ties for learning for  more on this, see Haythornthwaite, 2002b, and hence for support  and analytics that show how both kinds of ties and their respective  roles play out in learning and information sharing.   2.2 Network Configurations  Another area of network studies addresses the information  consequences of particular configurations of networks. A dense  network high density, for example, provides many links among  members of a network, increasing the likelihood that opportunities  will arise to interact and pass on information or gossip. By  contrast, a sparse network low density, provides few links among  network members, potentially increasing the time it takes for  information to reach all members of the network. Networks can be  structured around a highly central actor, i.e., configured in such a  way that all information must pass through a single network actor  before reaching others network star or broker, with a high  betweenness score; filling a structural hole, Burt 1992;  representing a cutpoint which, if removed, splits the network into  multiple networks. Networks may show a particularly long, path  length, so that information must pass through many actors to get   19    from one end of the network to another; they may show connected  cliques of actors; or they may reveal isolates who are not  connected at all to the general information flow in the network.  By itself, a dense or sparse network should not be considered  unquestionably good or bad for information exchange. Dense  networks facilitate exchange of both fact and fiction. They  promote constant visibility of others and their actions, creating  both the pro and con of a small village. Sparsity can help keep  information and actions private, allowing relative anonymity.  Network connections also require time to maintain. An individual  with lots of connections can be overwhelmed by the amount of  information arriving and/or the responsibility for forwarding this  information. Structures that help in knowing who should get what  kind of information and/or who to go to for specific information  acting as information sources and sinks  whether explicit or  learned as cognitive social networks  reduce the work the entire  network needs to do the keep track of important information. For  examples of learning networks from a personal network view,  looking at the number of ties and relations an individual learner  maintains, see Haythornthwaite, 2000, and from a whole network  view, see Haythornthwaite, 2002a, 2006; for further discussion of  networks and information exchange, see Haythornthwaite, 2010.  A question in learning environments is what kind of configuration  works best, and for what kind of outcomes. A goal of task  completion, e.g., for projects, may indicate a need for densely  connected cliques, whereas a goal of collaborative learning may  suggest aiming for high density across the whole network.  The  caveat is that simple measures like density may fail to capture the  nuances of relational content across networks. Thus, what kind of  relations tie actors becomes important for understanding what  comprises a learning tie, and what sustains a learning community,  both for providing new information and also for providing the  support that facilitates acquisition and understanding of new  and/or difficult concepts.   With this background, the following describes a few areas of my  research on learning networks as illustration of network effects  and how networks can be used to view learning.   3. LEARNING: FROM TIES TO  NETWORKS Before we can look at learning networks, we need to understand  what is meant by a learning tie  i.e., what is it that connects  people in a way that leads them to say I learned from this  person, while part of this class, as a member of a team, etc.    3.1 Relations and Ties  Two studies have tried to tease out the multiple threads that  connect people in work and learning relationships. In the first  study, interactions were studied among members of an academic  department referred to as Cerise Haythornthwaite & Wellman,  1998. Group members answered 24 questions about a variety of  their work and social interactions with  others in the group, as  well as about the type of work and friendship tie they maintained  with each person. A factor analysis revealed six dimensions of  work and social interaction. Two related to work practices:  Receiving Work and Giving Work each engaged in by 57% two  related to major work products : Collaborative Writing 32%, and  Computer Programming 56%; and two related to social support:  Sociability 86%, and Major Emotional Support 7%.   In a later study of three interdisciplinary research teams,  qualitative and semi-structured interviews provided data on  interaction and learning between the respondent and the five to  eight others with whom they interacted most frequently relating to   team work Haythornthwaite, 2006. Coding the data for learning  based on answers to questions on Who do you learn from or  receive help in understanding something from suggested nine  categories of learning. In terms of frequency of occurrence across  the teams, four major categories were found: Factual knowledge  about the discipline, Process how to knowledge, Method  knowledge, and engagement in Joint research. Minor areas of  exchange included Technology knowledge, Socialization,  Generation of new ideas, and Networking e.g., for jobs, with a  very few reporting a tie based on Administration.   The purpose in mentioning these studies for learning analytics is  to highlight that working and learning relationships are predicated  on a range of relations, some instrumental, some social. Looking  at relational dimensions shows the kinds of exchanges that will  need support socially, pedagogically, technically, and that can be  examined and addressed in support of learning.   The network data on these relations also shows who is connected  via which relations. For example, in the study of interdisciplinary  teams, it appears that factual knowledge across disciplines was  exchanged more among senior personnel, whereas method  knowledge tended to be exchanged between others involved in  methodological aspects of the work. This kind of finding  highlights another aspect of social networks analysis, which is the  identification of roles and positions based on finding repeated  patterns of social interaction and relational structure. Ideas of the  network star, broker or technological gatekeeper are already well  known from offline networks. Online environments are generating  new kinds of roles and positions such as wizards, newbies, and  even trolls. In online learning, a learner-leader role has been  identified Montague, 2006, and online roles have been awarded to  individuals who contribute in online learning communities  Preston, 2008.  Moreover, much of what is discussed about online  teaching and collaborative learning points directly to the impact of  change in roles, i.e., toward a network position of facilitator rather  than authority with regard to knowledge.    3.2 Ties and Media Use  The network data also revealed how exchanges are structured  across the group and across media. Data from the Cerise study,  and from studies of interaction among online class members,  showed that pairs who communicated infrequently and/or reported  a weak friendship or a work-only tie, maintained ties through  fewer media than others. Contrary to expectations of a task- medium fit, instead there was a tie-media relationship: with the  strength of the tie associated with the number of media used,  demonstrating media multiplexity effect Haythornthwaite &  Wellman, 1998.  The later studies of online learners also revealed another effect.  Studies of who talked to whom, about what, and via which media  in classes of online learners showed that the use of media  followed a unidimensional scale. Infrequent contacts used one  medium, and, in general, this was the medium established by the  teacher as the key meeting ground for the class  e.g., a live class  session involving chat, and/or required online discussion boards.  Other media were added to a pairs repertoire in a consistent  manner within each group: e.g., adding email, and phone onto  chat and discussion. In the Cerise group, which could meet face- to-face, the first means of contact were unscheduled face-to-face  meetings, then scheduled class or research meetings, then email,  phone, and other means.   The importance of the primary means of communication  established for such groups led to the proposition that a medium  set for such group interaction forms a latent tie structure on which   20    those who do not yet know each other well can build ties, first  weak and then strong Haythornthwaite, 2002a, 2005. What is  notable about this is that such structures can only be organized  and established by an authority other than the class or group  participants  because at the initiation stage the participants do not  know each other. However, once ties start forming, those with  stronger ties may then work out their own ways of adding media  onto the base medium, strengthening the options and opportunities  for contact and increasing the resilience of the tie in the face of  changes in base media or authorities in charge of these media.  This leads into my proposed view of online learning crowds and  community from a social network perspective.   3.3 Networks to Crowds and Communities  In recent times the power of crowds as means of soliciting and  acquiring knowledge has come to the fore. After many years of  attention to the strong ties of community, and seeing these  become possible and active online, crowds ask for attention to  weak ties. But crowdsourcing also brings to the fore the question  of motivation, and why individuals contribute to crowdsourcing  initiatives. This last section summarizes my network perspective  on crowds and communities, making the connection between  these two forms of organizing along a dimension of weak to  strong ties. The continuity between these collectives can be found  in the nature of social network ties, but also in the ideas of latent  ties and the role of authorities outlined above.   In brief, I view crowds as a lightweight collaborative structure,  where weight refers to the interpersonal connection involved not  to the importance of the production being undertaken. It is light  because crowdsourced projects do not require knowing others and  working with others directly as a requirement of engagement.  Instead, they often ask for a little bit of work, with minimal  learning requirements, and few barriers to entry. On the other  hand, heavyweight peer productions or collaborations require  knowing others, paying attention to both the purpose of the  project and the opinions and contributions of others. The  association among peers is intricate and involved, based on social  conventions, reputations and rewards, and mutual visibility. While  some may offer crowd-like contribution to the heavyweight  enterprise, it only survives with a committed core of participants.  By contrast, the lightweight enterprise could survive a complete  changes of participants because its operation is dependent on an  authority who sets and manages interaction activity.   The light- and heavyweight ideas are describe in more detail  elsewhere Haythornthwaite, 2009, 2011. In brief, the lightweight  model operates based on discrete, uniform contributions submitted  by unrelated individuals, e.g., in proofreading texts  http://www.pgdp.net. The lightweight model accepts contributions  that are all similar, requiring little learning or training for  submission, with weak or no association between contributions,  and minimal commitment to belonging and continuing with future  contributions. It depends on interest to the overall project, but not  an interest in other contributors.  By contrast, the heavyweight operates based on attention to others  and their contributions, with individuals adding their own  different contributions, e.g., as in peer-reviewed scholarly  communication. It depends on attention to both the purpose of the  peer production and to members and membership in the  community. The heavyweight model depends on contributions of  different sorts and sizes; it requires learning and apprenticeship  before contributing, a strong attention interconnection between  contributions and contributors; and commitment to belonging,  staying, and continued contribution.    Motivational factors for contribution in heavyweight enterprises  can be bound up in reputation and reward, but the case for  lightweight participation is less clear. From an individual  perspective, I argue that motivation for participation derives from  co-orientation to the crowdsourced project  such as its content,  its platform, etc. For example, in a study of motivation relating to  contribution to OpenStreetMap, Budhathoki 2010 found that  attachment to local regions and to open source principles support  contribution to this project. While individual career or future  rewards may be tied to this kind of contribution, an extreme  lightweight endeavor will need to depend on common interest to  draw participants, even as it adds means of creating reputation and  reward to keep participants.   Where learning enterprises now span the range from online help  sites of user-generated content, to virtual communities of learners  and knowledge production, these dimensions of light and  heavyweight suggest ways of organizing for these different kinds  of peer production. Even as emphasis is on heavyweight learning,  the lightweight structure provides ways for lurkers, novices and  new members to begin contribution before joining with a  heavyweight commitment. These two ends of collective  production suggest ways of modeling as well as monitoring online  interaction, e.g., to see if the resultant learning environment has  become a heavyweight, self-sustaining community, or whether it  has stalled on reaching that expression by rotating memberships,  heavy authority structures, or lack of reputation and reward  structures.     4. SUMMARY This brief account of learning from a social network perspective  can only stand as an idea generator for further research and  application to learning analytics, with ideas to be generated on  how to integrate and combine social network perspectives with  the wider range of learning analytic techniques. In summarizing, I  see that a network perspective provides the following ways that  learning provides the following ways that learning can be  represented and addressed:    Learning can be a relation that connects people    Learning can be the characterization of the tie, based on  multiple, contextually determined relations that support the  report of learning or evidence of learning    Learning relations can be taken as input for design, either  social or technical, e.g., when analysis of relations show the  mix of educational and social interaction that supports  learning, and when technology may be brought in to support  one or more of these relations    Learning can be a characterization of the outcome of  relations, e.g., when a group becomes a learning community    Learning as the network outcome of relations, e.g., the social  or learning capital of the network, and thus examined for  when interactions support the social capital of knowledge  and continued knowledge evaluation and acquisition    Learning as contact with ambient influence, e.g., as informal  and ubiquitous learning leads to interest and participation in  knowledge productions.   While much of learning analytics may focus on the class and/or  the educational institution, I also see there are many  transformations happening in learning on and through the web in  collaborative peer productions and mobile and ubiquitous learning  that are equally open to examination from a learning networks  perspective and a learning analytics perspective. In moving   21    forward on learning from a network and analytic perspective, I  look forward to further research that addresses learning as it  relates to social network ties, networks, crowds and communities.   5. REFERENCES  Bakharia, A. & Dawson, S. 2011. SNAPP: A birds-eye view of  temporal participant interaction. Paper presented at the Learning  Analytics and Knowledge Conference, Banff, Alta.  Bollen, J., Van de Sompel, H,. Hagberg, A., Bettencourt, L.,  Chute, R., Rodriguez, M.A., & Balakireva, L. 2009. Clickstream  data yields high-resolution maps of science. PLoS ONE, 43:  e4803. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0004803.   Borgatti, S. T., Mehra, A., Brass, D., & Labianca, G. 2009.  Network analysis in the social sciences. Science, 323, 892-895.  Bruffee, K. A. 1993. Collaborative Learning: Higher Education,  Interdependence, and the Authority of Knowledge. Baltimore:  John Hopkins University Press.   Budhathoki, N. R. 2010. Participants' Motivations to Contribute  Geographic Information in an Online Community. Unpublished  doctoral dissertation, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,  Champaign, IL.  Burt, R. 1992. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of  Competition. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.  Carrington, P.J., Scott, J. & Wasserman, S. Eds.2005. Models and  methods in social network analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press.  Clark, H. H. & Brennan, S. E. 1991. Grounding in  communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley  Eds., Perspectives on socially shared cognition pp. 127-149.  Washington, D. C. : American Psychological Association.   Daly, A. J. Ed. 2010. Social network theory and educational  change. Harvard Education Press.   Engestrm, Y. & Middleton, D. 1996. Cognition and  communication at work. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  Haythornthwaite, C. 2000. Online personal networks: Size,  composition and media use among distance learners. New Media  and Society, 2, 2, 195-226.  Haythornthwaite, C. 2002a. Strong, weak and latent ties and the  impact of new media. The Information Society, 18, 5, 385 - 401.  Haythornthwaite, C. 2002b. Building social networks via  computer networks: Creating and sustaining distributed learning  communities. In K.A. Renninger & W. Shumar, Building virtual  communities: Learning and change in cyberspace pp.159-190.  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  Haythornthwaite, C. 2005. Social networks and Internet  connectivity effects.  Information, Communication and Society, 8,  2: 125-147.  Haythornthwaite, C. 2006. Learning and knowledge exchanges in  interdisciplinary collaborations. Journal of the American Society  for Information Science and Technology, 57, 8, 1079-1092.   Haythornthwaite, C. 2008. Learning relations and networks in  web-based communities. International Journal of Web Based  Communities, 4, 2, 140-158.  Haythornthwaite, C. 2009. Crowds and communities: Light and  heavyweight models of peer production. Proceedings of the 42nd  Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Los  Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society.  http//hdl.handle.net/2142/9457.  Haythornthwaite, C. 2010. Social networks and information  transfer. In M.J. Bates & M.N. Maack Eds., Encyclopedia  of Library and Information Sciences, third edition, 1, 1, 4837- 4847. NY: Taylor & Francis.  Haythornthwaite, C. 2011. Online knowledge crowds and  communities. In Knowledge Communities. Reno, NV: Center for  Basque Studies. http://hdl.handle.net/2142/14198.  Haythornthwaite, C. & de Laat, M. in press. Social network  informed design for learning with educational technology. In A.D.  Olofsson & J. O. Lindberg, Eds.. Informed Design of Educational  Technologies in Higher Education: Enhanced Learning and  Teaching. IGI Global.   Hollingshead, A. B., Fulk, J., & Monge, P. 2002. Fostering  intranet knowledge sharing: An integration of transactive memory  and public goods approaches. In P. Hinds & S. Kiesler Eds.,  Distributed work:  New research on working across distance  using technology pp. 335-355. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  Lima, M. forthcoming. Visual complexity: Mapping patterns of  information. NY: Princeton Architectural Press.  Lin, N. 2008. A network theory of social capital. In Dario  Castiglione, Jan W. van Deth & Guglielmo WollebEds.. The  Handbook of Social Capital pp. 50-59. Oxford: Oxford University  Press.  Luff, P., Hindmarsh, J. & Heath, C. 2000. Workplace Studies:  Recovering Work Practice and Informing System Design.  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press  Montague, R-A. 2006. Riding the Waves: A Case Study of  Learners and Leaders in Library and Information Science  Education. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of  Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL.  Preston, C. J. 2008. Braided learning: an emerging process  observed in e-communities of practice, International Journal of  Web Based Communities, 4, 2, 220-243.  Putnam, R. D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of  American Community. NY: Simon & Schuster.  Scott, J., & Carrington, P. Eds.. 2010. Handbook of social network  analysis. London: Sage.  Trier, M. 2007. Virtual knowledge communities - IT-supported  visualization and analysis. Verlag.  Wasserman, S. & Faust, K. 1994. Social network analysis.  Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.  Wegner, D. 1987. Transactive memory: a contemporary analysis  of the group mind. In B. Mullen & G. Goethals Eds., Theories of  Group Behavior pp. 185-208. New York: Springer-Verlag.  22    