Media multiplexity in connectivist MOOCs  Rafa Absar   Department of Computer Science, Clarkson University  P.O. Box 5815, Potsdam, NY 13699-5815   1-315-261-4837  rafa.absar@mail.mcgill.ca   Anatoliy Gruzd  Ted Rogers School of Management, Ryerson University    350 Victoria Street, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5B 2K3  1-416-979-5000 x7937   gruzd@ryerson.ca   Caroline Haythornthwaite   The iSchool at The University of British Columbia  Suite 470-1961 East Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6T 1Z1    1-604-827-4790  c.haythorn@ubc.ca   	    Drew Paulin  Sauder School of Business, University of British Columbia  453C-2053 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z2    1-604-822-5344   drew.paulin@sauder.ubc.ca   	    ABSTRACT  In this poster, we present work on exploring use of multiple social  media platforms for learning in two connectivist MOOCs (or  cMOOCs) to develop and evaluate methods for learning analytics  to detect and study collaborative learning processes.    Categories and Subject Descriptors  K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education]: Collaborative learning,  J.1 [Administrative Data Processing] Education;   General Terms  Measurement, Human Factors.  Keywords  Social Media, Learning, Connectivism, Social Networks,  MOOCs.   1. INTRODUCTION  Contemporary learning can leverage multiple media platforms to  create and sustain social relationships and communities in which  learners participate, discover, share, and co-construct of  knowledge. An open question is what work these media do in  support of learning, and how each medium contributes to whole of  learning Our goal is to develop methods to detect and study  learning processes across multiple social media platforms. This  poster presents preliminary work regarding a connectivist MOOC  that engages learners across multiple platforms. While connecting  across platforms provides opportunity for understanding learning  across media and communities, it presents both users and  researchers with challenges associated with using, connecting,  collecting and processing of data from multiple platforms.    2. SOCIAL MEDIA AND LEARNING  Learning in new networked, mediated spaces is socially  embedded, tied to the interests of the learner in multiple,  overlapping social spheres, and supported by a culture of freely  created and shared content. Such practices are gaining attention in  higher education [1,2,3], and align with a connectivist approach to  learning where learners negotiate and construct meaning and   knowledge across a network of learners, platforms, and sources  [4] in support of personal, work and educational outcomes.  Challenges exist for learners due to the need to bridge learning  across multiple platforms. Responses call for systems support for  data aggregation [5] and the facilitation of personal learning  environments [6,7]. Researchers face challenges of linking  identities across multiple social media [8], with potential methods  including focusing on unique behavioural patterns exhibited  across platforms, informational redundancies offered by the user  across platforms, and machine learning towards effective user  identification [9,10].   3. MULTI-PLATFORM cMOOCS  This poster presents an examination of multi-platform data from  two connectivist courses: CCK11 (Connectivism and Connective  Knowledge 2011; 12 week course; Jan. to April 2011) and  Change11 (35 weeks; Sept. 2011 to May 2012). Discussions and  learning processes in these courses were supported through the  following tasks: Aggregate across a wide variety of resources to  read, watch or play with; Remix, keeping track of in-class  activities using blogs or other types of online posts; Repurpose, go  beyond repeating to creating content; Feed Forward, by sharing  work with others in or outside the course to spread knowledge.    Course resources were provided to learners using gRSShopper  and online seminars delivered using Elluminate. The courses were  not limited to a single platform and content was distributed across  the web; participants were encouraged to create blogs using any  blogging service, discuss on Google groups, tweet, or use other  means (e.g., Flickr, Second Life, YouTube). Participants were  asked to use the #cck11 or #change11 tags in whatever content  they created and shared. Content was aggregated daily for an  online newsletter.   To examine participation, data were scraped form the archives of  the daily newsletters, including tweets, discussion threads, blog  posts, and comments on blogs (Table 1)    Table 1: Number of posts on each platform  Platform CCK11 Change11  Twitter posts (tweets) 1722 5665  Blog posts 812 2486  Blog comments 306 134  Discussion thread posts 68 87   4. DATA CHALLENGES  Several research and technical challenges come up when  collecting and processing data from cMOOCs, primarily because  they do not use a single, centralized platform to support class   Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that  copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights  for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other  uses, contact the Owner/Author.    LAK15, March 16-20, 2015, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA.  ACM 978-1-4503-3417-4/15/03.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723654   424    interactions. These include a number of data collection issues: we  developed a custom script to scrape data from a publicly available  archive of daily newsletters that included snippets of participants  blog posts (with the link to the original posts), comments left on  each blog post, threaded discussions and Twitter messages;  however this excluded non-archived data, and messages that  failed to use the class hashtags. Only snippets of blog posts were  available in the daily newsletters, so we attempted to follow  links to the original blog posts to retrieve them as well,  encountering a number of technical issues (blogs on different  servers; expired URLs; domains that had disappeared; password- protection, etc.). Issues also emerged re the encoding of  webpages, particularly for self-hosted blogs on unique domain  names.   Other issues arose from the course material itself, since this can be  presented and stored in a variety of formats. That participants  were located around the world added another challenge to the pre- processing stage (e.g., posts not in English). Data collection also  requires a significant amount of cleaning up after extraction is  complete. Some newsletter elements were redundant and had to be  detected and removed. Discussion threads as stored in the course  archive page only included replies to the original post, but  unfortunately did not include the original post itself. This was  further complicated by the fact that although all blog postings  were RSS'd to the course page (by request of the course  instructors), they were not archived, so we have to try to scrape  the original blog pages themselves (if available). Finally, we  noticed that some newsletter pages were missing from the archive.    5. Identity resolution  To be able to analyze cross-platform data, we needed an effective  way to distinguish between the same participants across different  platforms despite different usernames for each platform. This kind  of identity resolution has been addressed using computational  linguistics and machine learning techniques [11] and can be  separated into two tasks:  coreference resolution (resolving single  identities across multiple platforms) and alias resolution  (identifying two or more people with the same name or alias  across platforms). cMOOC participants could (and some did)  remain entirely anonymous when participating in the class. As a  result, we often did not have enough information to match users  automatically. To achieve the highest possible level of data, we  took a manual brute-force approach of matching usernames across  platforms in which every username from each platform was  matched and cross-referenced with usernames from other  platforms and any matching ones grouped together. Through this  process, we identified the unique users who posted in each  platform (Table 2). We were also able to identify the users that  posted in more than one platform (Table 3).  Although the number  of users who posted across three or more platforms is small, a  reasonable number of participants posted in at least two platforms.  Although this is a promising approach, it is time-consuming and  may miss identifying single identities or erroneously group two  separate identities as one.  Faster, more reliable and real-time  identity resolution methods are required and are the subject of  future work.  Table 2: Number of unique users who posted on each platform  Platform CCK11 Change11  Twitter 145 794  Blog 105 278  Blog comments 56 27  Discussion thread posts 18 17   Table 3: Number of users who posted in more than 1 platform  No. of users posting in CCK11 Change11  4 platforms 2 3  3 platforms 10 5  2 platforms 32 103  6. FUTURE DIRECTIONS  This work focused on determining technical and logistical  challenges associated with the collection of social media data, and  identity resolution across multiple platforms. We found only a  small percentage of users posted to multiple platforms during the  class; instead, among the four different ways of interacting with  others in the class, Twitter was the single, most popular platform.  And even though blogs (specifically blog posts) were the second  largest content generators after Twitter; our manual review of the  blog posts revealed that they were primarily used to take notes  and write reflection-type pieces, and they were not used to interact  with one another. We started this project with the expectation that  we would need to identify and resolve online identities across  multiple platforms; but in reality, both classes primarily relied  only on Twitter for user-to-user interaction. We conclude that the  need for identity resolution may be very low. We expect that a  similar pattern may occur in other cMOOC-type courses, i.e., that  only a few of the most active users rely on two or more media  platforms. Our future work will examine this further; if it holds,  the main implication is that there might not be a need for  resource-intensive identity resolution algorithms when studying  social media multiplexity and that we might be able to analyze  each platform independently from other platforms, at least from  the perspective of identifying overlapping communities of users  across platforms.    7. REFERENCES  [1] Dahlstrom, E., Walker, J.D., & Dziuban, C. 2013. ECAR Study of   Undergraduate Students and Information Technology, 2013.  Retrieved from: http://www.educause.edu/library/resources/ecar- study-undergraduate-students-and-information-technology-2013    [2] Smith, S.D. and Caruso, J.B. 2010. 2010 The ECAR Study of  Undergraduate Students.   [3] Moran, M., Seaman, J., & Tinti-Kane, H. 2012. How Today's Higher  Education Faculty Use Social Media. Pearson/Babson Survey  Research Group.     [4] Siemens, G. 2005. Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital  age. International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance  Learning. 2, 1 (2005), 310.   [5] Vu, X.T. et al. 2014. Knowledge and Systems Engineering. 245,  (2014), 109119.   [6] Bogdanov, E., Limpens, F., Li, N., et al. 2012. A social media  platform in higher education. Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Global  Engineering Ed. Conf. , 18.   [7] Gillet, D. 2013. Personal learning environments as enablers for  connectivist MOOCs. 2013 12th International Conference on  Information Technology Based Higher Education and Training  (ITHET). (Oct. 2013), 15.   [8] Gruzd, A. et al. 2014. Learning analytics for the social media age.  LAK 14. ACM (2014), 254256.   [9] Zafarani, R. and Liu, H. 2009. Connecting Corresponding Identities  across Communities. ICWSM (2009), 354357.   [10] Zafarani, R. and H. Liu. 2013. Connecting users across social media  sites: A behavioral-modeling approach. In Proceedings of the 19th  ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery  and Data Mining, KDD 13, 41-49.   [11]Gruzd, A., & Haythornthwaite, C. 2011. Networking Online: Cyber  communities. In Scott, J., & Carrington, P. (Eds.), Handbook of  Social Network Analysis. London: Sage, 449-487.     425      