
Educational Data Mining with Python and Apache Spark: A
Hands-on Tutorial

Lalitha Agnihotri
McGraw-Hill Education

281 Summer Street
Boston, Massachusetts, US

lalitha.agnihotri
@mheducation.com

Shirin Mojarad
McGraw-Hill Education

281 Summer Street
Boston, Massachusetts, US

shirin.mojarad
@mheducation.com

Nicholas Lewkow
McGraw-Hill Education

281 Summer Street
Boston, Massachusetts, US

nicholas.lewkow
@mheducation.com

Alfred Essa
McGraw-Hill Education

281 Summer Street
Boston, Massachusetts, US

alfred.essa
@mheducation.com

ABSTRACT
Enormous amount of educational data has been accumu-
lated through Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), as
well as commercial and non-commercial learning platforms.
This is in addition to the educational data released by US
government since 2012 to facilitate disruption in education
by making data freely available. The high volume, variety
and velocity of collected data necessitate use of big data
tools and storage systems such as distributed databases for
storage and Apache Spark for analysis.

This tutorial will introduce researchers and faculty to real-
world applications involving data mining and predictive an-
alytics in learning sciences. In addition, the tutorial will
introduce statistics required to validate and accurately re-
port results. Topics will cover how big data is being used to
transform education. Specifically, we will demonstrate how
exploratory data analysis, data mining, predictive analytics,
machine learning, and visualization techniques are being ap-
plied to educational big data to improve learning and scale
insights driven from millions of student's records.

The tutorial will be held over a half day and will be hands
on with pre-posted material. Due to the interdisciplinary
nature of work, the tutorial appeals to researchers from a
wide range of backgrounds including big data, predictive
analytics, learning sciences, educational data mining, and
in general, those interested in how big data analytics can
transform learning. As a prerequisite, attendees are required
to have familiarity with at least one programming language.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-2138-9.
DOI: 10.1145/1235

CCS Concepts
•Information systems ! Data mining; Data cleaning;
•Mathematics of computing!Exploratory data anal-
ysis; •Computing methodologies ! MapReduce al-
gorithms; Modeling and simulation; Modeling method-

ologies; Model verification and validation;

Keywords
educational data mining, learning analytics, python, spark,
predictive analytics, machine learning, exploratory data anal-
ysis, big data, data mining, visualization, simulation, paral-
lel computing

1. MOTIVATION
A number of commentators, including Clayton Christensen,

have argued that education is prime for disruption [1]. Ed-
ucation has become a part of big data revolution as educa-
tional data meets the four main elements of big data includ-
ing volume, velocity, variety and veracity. Large volume of
educational data is collected through online learning plat-
forms such as MOOCs and commercial e-learning products.
This data is oftentimes generated real-time as students’ ac-
tivities happen on the e-learning platform and comes in dif-
ferent formats including clickstreams, text and comments,
short answers, attendance, performance, etc. The uncer-
tainty in educational data including biases, noise and ab-
normality necessitates a process in which the data is stored
and mined meaningful to the problem being analyzed.

Educational data mining (EDM) is an interdisciplinary
field entailing data mining, machine learning and statis-
tics, and their application to education settings to transform
teaching and learning. EDM has received much attention
from researchers to derive insights from learners'activities
and has been adopted by many institutions to improve the
services they provide and for increasing student grades and
retention.

Since LAK's primary focus is learning analytics, this tu-
torial will be beneficial for the majority of audience, provid-
ing accessible tools to perform predictive analytics and data
mining on big educational data sets.

10.1145/1235


2. OBJECTIVES
Given the focus on practical skill-building, the primary

objectives of the proposed tutorial are:

• Understand the basics of exploratory data analysis (EDA).

• Learn to use Python programming language.

• Learn how to build and validate predictive models.

• Learn the foundations of parallel computing for work-
ing with large datasets and large scale models.

While there are several conference series (e.g., LAK, EDM)
focusing on the intersection between educational and com-
puting research, to the best of our knowledge there have
not been any tutorials covering all aspects of data analysis
including EDA, predictive analytics, reporting results using
appropriate statistical measures, and visualizing results. A
subset of this tutorial was presented at ECTEL 15 (Euro-
pean Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning) as a
part of a half day tutorial. The session was very well re-
ceived by the audience and the recording is available online
at http://educate.gast.it.uc3m.es/wapla/.

Most of the available tools for predictive analytics require
enviable knowledge of technical details of underlying algo-
rithms. However, there are also attempts to develop plat-
forms for broader communities of researchers. Weka is a
widely used data mining platform in java. Although easy
to use, Weka's main packages are not optimized for memory
intensive tasks on large data sets. Our goal in this tutorial
is to make programming and mining big data in education
using Python accessible for a wide range of audience. The
Python programming language - with its predictive model-
ing and visualization libraries such as scikit-learn and Bokeh
- provides all the necessary components for mining big data
in an e?cient and e?ective manner.

3. AGENDA
The preliminary tutorial agenda is as follow:

• Exploratory data analysis (45 minutes).

• Predictive modeling (60 minutes).

• Applying predictive models to educational datasets (60
minutes).

• Introduction to Spark (30 minutes).

4. TARGET GROUP
The tutorial appeals to researchers from a wide range of

backgrounds including big data, predictive analytics, learn-
ing sciences, educational data mining and researchers inter-
ested in learning more about how analytics can transform
teaching and learning. As a prerequisite, attendees are re-
quired to have familiarity with at least one programming
language.
According to previous experience from presenting simi-

lar tutorial at ECTEL, we will be expecting an estimated
number of 20 participants. We will have our colleagues from
McGraw-Hill Education to help with the logistics and to help
the participants with the installation and use of material.

5. FORMAT
Each of the four objectives mentioned above will be cov-

ered by a corresponding IPython notebook. Participants
can download the data and notebooks before or during the
session from our GitHub and stay engaged by running the
notebook as we walk through them. At the end of each ob-
jective, we will form multiple groups and will assign a mini
project to each group to solve. We will discuss the outcome
of the exercises before moving to the next objective.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Christensen, C. M., Horn, M. B., Caldera, L.,

and Soares, L. Disrupting college: How disruptive
innovation can deliver quality and a?ordability to
postsecondary education. Innosight Institute (2011).

7. ORGANIZERS’ BIOGRAPHY
Lalitha Agnihotri is a Senior Data Scientist at McGraw-

Hill Education. Lalitha Agnihotri holds a Ph.D. from Columbia
University in Computer Science and has over 15 years of
experience in the Data Mining/Modeling area. She has au-
thored over 40 peer reviewed conference and journal papers
and has presented at several international conferences. She
has applied a wide variety of learning algorithms to huge
amounts of data to enable applications related to prediction
of outcomes.

Shirin Mojarad is a Data Scientist at McGraw-Hill Ed-
ucation. She has wide experience in framing and conduct-
ing complex analyses and experiments using large datasets
to find trends in diverse data sources and analyze behav-
ioral patterns using advanced statistical modeling and data
mining techniques. Shirin was formerly a senior analytics
specialist in the Advanced Analytics team at the Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce (CIBC) and prior to that, a
data mining consultant with a leading software company in
predictive analytics. She received her Ph.D. in Electrical
Engineering and her M.Sc. in Communications and Signal
Processing from Newcastle University U.K., where she spe-
cialized in predictive modeling and artificial neural networks.

Nicholas Lewkow is a Data Scientist at McGraw-Hill Edu-
cation. He holds a PhD in computational astrophysics from
the University of Connecticut. Additionally, he has con-
ducted research in astrophysics and high performance com-
puting at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Nicholas is currently
interested in big data analytics, parallel computing, and ma-
chine learning.

Alfred Essa is Vice President R&D and Analytics at McGraw-
Hill Education. Previously he was Director of Analytics Re-
search & Strategy at Desire2Learn, where he led product
development of the Student Success System the acquisition
of Degree Compass and the architecture of the joint ana-
lytics solution with IBM. He was Associate Vice Chancellor
and Deputy CIO at Minnesota State Colleges & Universities
where he led academic online strategy, enterprise infrastruc-
ture services, network security academic technologies and
web development. Previously he was CIO at MIT's Sloan
School of Management, where he won an MIT Excellence
Award, was Principal Investigator of the iLearn project, and
founded an Open Source project called dotLRN.

http://educate.gast.it.uc3m.es/wapla/

	Motivation
	Objectives
	Agenda
	Target Group
	Format
	References
	Organizers' Biography


