
LAL Workshop: Learning Analytics for Learners 
S. BULL 

University College London, UK 
s.bull@ucl.ac.uk 

B. GINON 
University of Birmingham, UK 

b.ginon.1@bham.ac.uk 

J. KAY  
University of Sydney, Australia  

judy.kay@sydney.edu.au 

M. KICKMEIER-RUST 
Technische Universität Graz, Austria  
michael.kickmeier-rust@tugraz.at 

M.D. JOHNSON 
University of Birmingham, UK 
M.D.Johnson.1@bham.ac.uk

 

CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing Human computer interaction 
(HCI); user model, user studies Visualization; Visual ana-
lytics; Visualization systems and tools. 

Keywords 
Visual Learning Analytics; Dashboards; Open Learner Models; 
Learning Analytics for Learners; Learning data for learners. 

1. MOTIVATION 
With the arrival of ‘big data’ in education, the potential was 
recognised for learning analytics to track students’ learning, to 
reveal patterns in their learning, or to identify at-risk students, in 
addition to guiding reform and supporting educators in improv-
ing teaching and learning processes [1]. Learning Analytics 
dashboards have been used at all levels, including institutional, 
regional and national level [2]. In classroom use, while learning 
visualisations are often based on counts of activity data or inter-
action patterns, there is increasing recognition that learning 
analytics relate to learning, and should therefore provide peda-
gogically useful information [3]. While increasing numbers of 
technology-enhanced learning applications are embracing the 
potential of learning analytics at the classroom level, often these 
are aimed at teachers. However, learners can also benefit from 
learning analytics data (e.g. [4][5]). 

Open learner models have long been showing learners infor-
mation about their learning, often with the aim of encouraging 
metacognitive behaviours such as reflection, planning, self-
assessment and self-directed learning [6]. Benefits of showing 
learning data to learners for such purposes are now also being 
investigated in learning analytics (e.g. [7][8]). Nevertheless, 
despite a few exceptions, there is limited reference to both open 
learner models and learning analytics in the same publications. 
One of the aims of this workshop, therefore, is to raise awareness 
of the overlap, as well as differences, in approaches to, and pur-
poses of visualising learning data in these two fields. In particular, 

we will bring our substantial expertise in open learner model re-
search, together with our more recent experience in learning ana-
lytics for learners, to facilitate discussion and exchange of expe-
riences amongst participants. 

2. OBJECTIVES 
The first objective of this workshop is to bring together people 
working in learning analytics generally, open learner models, 
and learning dashboards, to raise awareness of projects and ap-
proaches across research areas, that are relevant to learning 
analytics for learners. 

The second objective of the workshop is to organise a state of 
the art review on learning analytics for learners, to be co-
authored with key participants at the workshop. This aims to 
cover the themes in the first objective, but may be adapted to 
incorporate expertise and interests of workshop participants. 

Finally, we aim to continue supporting research on learning 
analytics for learners in future workshops, and would like to 
gather suggestions for key topics for the next LAL proposal. 
This will allow us to foster and stimulate ideas in areas of inter-
est to participants that may not yet be mature enough for inclu-
sion in the review article or workshop proceedings. 

In short: we would like to bring our understanding of work re-
lated to learning analytics for learners to the learning analytics 
community, to learn from others’ work on learning analytics for 
learners, and together build a vision for learning analytics to 
directly support and facilitate the learning process for learners. 

3. TOPICS 
The workshop topics of interest include but are not limited to 
the following: 

! Open learner models 
! Learning analytics dashboards to support learning 
! Use cases and applications of learning analytics for learners 

4. TARGET GROUP 
The workshop is of interest not only to those who are currently 
working on learning analytics for learners, but also those whose 
primary interest is with other stakeholders. The topic is timely, 
with recognition of its importance growing (e.g. [7][8][9]). We 
are targeting mainstream learning analytics researchers as well 
as those who are also involved in related fields such as artificial 
intelligence in education. We accepted eight submissions as 
interactive presentations and demonstrations from authors with 
advanced research in this area, to inform broader discussion 
through the workshop. These come from researchers with expe-
rience in designing or using learning analytics, and ideas about 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and 
that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. 
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions 
from Permissions@acm.org. 
LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883853 
 



how these might usefully support learners directly. These in-
clude demonstrations of learning analytics for learners. In addi-
tion, the workshop format was created to be attractive to those 
beginning their path in learning analytics for learners, as a space 
to learn about related approaches and to have an opportunity to 
gain feedback on their early ideas. We anticipated this to be a 
particularly useful place for PhD researchers to become actively 
involved in the community. At the same time, the workshop 
aimed to draw upon those who are more experienced, who wish 
to contribute to the growing work in this timely and important 
topic.   

The international Program Committee comprises researchers 
from the learning analytics community, with some also in relat-
ed fields. All submissions were reviewed by three program 
committee members. The following form the Program Commit-
tee: 

! Simon Buckingham Shum, University of Technology, Syd-
ney, Australia  

! Susan Bull, University College London, UK 
! Eva Durall, Aalto University, Finland  
! Albrecht Fortenbacher, HTW Berlin, Germany 
! Alyssa Friend Wise, Simon Fraser University, Canada  
! Dragan Gasevic, University of Edinburgh, UK 
! Blandine Ginon, University of Birmingham, UK 
! Dai Griffiths, University of Bolton, UK  
! Sharon Hsiao, Arizona State University, USA. 
! Stéphanie Jean-Daubias, University Claude Bernard of 

Lyon, France  
! Matthew Johnson, University of Birmingham, UK 
! Judy Kay, University of Sydney, Australia 
! Michael Kickmeier-Rust, Technische Universität Graz, 

Austria 
! Symeon Retalis, University of Piraeus, Greece  
! Ravi Vatrapu, Copenhagen Business School, Denmark 

5. FORMAT 
The workshop is a full day workshop, with the provisional 
schedule as below. The first half of the workshop comprises 
research paper, position paper and tool demonstrations, with a 
focus on interactive presentation styles.  

9.00 Workshop introductions: participants and themes 
9.30 

Interactive presentations and demonstrations 10.00 
10.30 
11.00 Coffee break 
11.30 

Interactive presentations and demonstrations 12.00 
12.30 
13.00 Lunch break 13.30 
14.00 Theme discussions in small groups 14.30 
15.00 Coffee break 
15.30 

Overall discussion and writing of a synthesis 16.00 
16.30 
17.00 Workshop end 

 

The second half of the workshop will be mainly devoted to ex-
change and relevant theme discussion in small groups. The 
themes reflect the given workshop topics and/or interests arising 
during the workshop. Group discussions will last 20 minutes, 
with groups switching topic/theme after each discussion. Groups 

may remain together, or participants may distribute themselves 
differently across themes, according to their interests. One of the 
organisers or participants will record discussion, and facilitate 
discussion as required. The final part of the workshop will in-
clude summaries from the group facilitators, further discussion 
amongst the larger group, and identification and planning of a 
joint journal article on Learning Analytics for Learners, and a 
YouTube video highlighting the potential for, and existence of 
learning analytics for learners.   

The main criteria for acceptance were as follows: 

! Relevance to the themes of the LAL workshop 
! Presentation and argumentation 
! Technical content (as applicable for demos / research papers) 
! Strength of evaluation (for research papers) 
! Novelty of the proposition 
! Interest for the Learning Analytics community 
! Overall quality of the paper 

 
Further information about the workshop can be found on the 
workshop website:  
http://css-kmi.tugraz.at/mkrwww/leas-box/lakws16/home.html. 
 
The workshop proceedings will be available as a CEUR Work-
shop volume. 

REFERENCES 
[1] Siemens, G. & Long P. 2011. Penetrating the Fog: Analyt-

ics in Learning and Education. EDUCAUSE Review 46 (5), 
30-38. 

[2] West, D. 2012. Big Data for Education: Data Mining, Data 
Analytics, and Web Dashboards. Governance Studies at 
Brookings. 1-10. 

[3] Gaševi?, D., Dawson, S., & Siemens, G. (2015). Let’s Not 
Forget: Learning Analytics are about Learning. Techtrends, 
59(1), 64-71. DOI: 10.1007/s11528-014-0822-x 

[4] Ferguson, R. and Buckingham Shum, S. (2012). Social 
Learning Analytics: Five Approaches. LAK 2012. 23–33. 
DOI: 10.1145/2330601.2330616 

[5] Vozniuk, A., Govaerts, S., & Gillet, D. 2013. Towards Portable 
Learning Analytics Dashboards. ICALT 2013, IEEE, 412-416. 
DOI: 10.1109/icalt.2013.126  

[6] Bull, S. & Kay, J. 2013. Open Learner Models as Drivers 
for Metacognitive Processes. In R. Azevedo & V. Aleven 
(eds), International Handbook of Metacognition and 
Learning Technologies, Springe,r New York, 349-365. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-5546-3_23 

[7] Dawson, S., Macfadyen, L., Risko E., Foulsham, T. & 
Kingstone, A. 2012. Using Technology to Encourage Self-
Directed Learning: The Collaborative Lecture Annotation 
System (CLAS). ASCILITE 2012. 

[8] Durall, E. & Gros, B. 2014. Learning Analytics as a Meta-
cognitive Tool. Proceedings of CSEDU 2014, 380-384. 

[9] Kay, J & Bull, S. 2015. New Opportunities with Open 
Learner Models and Visual Learning Analytics. In C. 
Conati, N. Heffernan, A. Mitrovic, M.F. Verdejo (eds) 
AIED, Springer Int. Publishing, Switzerland, 666-669. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-19773-9_87   



