
What Can Analytics Contribute to Accessibility in  
e-Learning Systems and to Disabled Students’ Learning? 

Martyn Cooper 
Institute of Educational Technology 

The Open University 
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes,  

MK7 6AA – UK 
Martyn.Cooper@open.ac.uk 

Rebecca Ferguson 
Institute of Educational Technology 

The Open University 
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes,  

MK7 6AA – UK 
Rebecca.Ferguson@open.ac.uk 

Annika Wolff 
Centre for Research in Computing 

The Open University 
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes,  

MK7 6AA – UK 
Annika.Wolff@open.ac.uk 

 
ABSTRACT 
This paper explores the potential of analytics for improving 
accessibility of e-learning and supporting disabled learners in their 
studies. A comparative analysis of completion rates of disabled 
and non-disabled students in a large five-year dataset is presented 
and a wide variation in comparative retention rates is 
characterized. Learning analytics enable us to identify and 
understand such discrepancies and, in future, could be used to 
focus interventions to improve retention of disabled students. An 
agenda for onward research, focused on Critical Learning Paths, is 
outlined. This paper is intended to stimulate a wider interest in the 
potential benefits of learning analytics for institutions as they try 
to assure the accessibility of their e-learning and provision of 
support for disabled students. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.1 [Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in Education 
– collaborative learning, distance learning. 

K.4.2 [Computers and Society]: Social Issues – assistive 
technologies for persons with disabilities, handicapped persons / 
special needs. 
General Terms 
Design; Human Factors; Measurement 

Keywords 
Learning Analytics; Metrics; Accessibility; HCI; Technology 
Enhanced Learning; Higher Education  

1. INTRODUCTION 
More and more universities are now rolling out learning analytics 
across the institution. To date, there has been little attention paid 
to the benefits that learning analytics may bring to disabled 
students, to those who support them in their learning, and to those 
responsible for ensuring that courses are accessible. 

 This paper reports research at The Open University (OU) that 
explores the utility and validity of using learning analytics to 
identify accessibility deficits in courses and course components 
and to target support for disabled students. 

2. ACCESSIBILITY AND ANALYTICS 
A review of the key points of reference for learning analytics [4] 
shows that, when identifying technical and research challenges, 
disability and accessibility have not been subjects of particular 
interest to researchers [4, 12]. Where these subjects have been 
addressed is within the academic analytics literature in the context 
of retention and success rates, [10]. Academic analytics marry 
‘large data sets with statistical techniques and predictive modeling 
to improve decision making’ [3]. Retention and success rates are 
areas of particular concern, and work on these topics draws on 
large-scale studies that often predate modern analytics 
approaches; for example, Tinto’s studies of factors affecting 
student persistence [13]. Such studies typically segment students 
using categories including gender, ethnicity and class. Disability 
is one variable amongst many [13]. 

3. DISABILITY AND ACCESSIBILITY 
Disabilities have traditionally been described with reference to the 
medical conditions from which they were seen to arise. This 
‘medical model of disability’ is encapsulated in the international 
classification of impairments, disabilities and handicaps produced 
by the World Health Organisation (WHO) [16]. 
The main alternative to the medical model of disability is the 
social model [14], which considers that disability is caused by the 
ways in which society is organised and responds to people. It is 
not an inevitable consequence of impairment but the product of 
physical, organisational and attitudinal barriers. This view has 
been highly influential in shaping policy, practice and attitudes. 
In 2001, the WHO revised its definitions, in part as a response to 
the social model, and in part because the medical model was of 
limited use in defining effective responses to the needs of disabled 
people. It described disability as ‘the outcome or result of a 
complex relationship between an individual’s health condition and 
personal factors, and of the external factors that represent the 
circumstances in which the individual lives’ [17]. 
The IMS Global Learning Consortium offered more education-
specific definitions when introducing its work on the development 
of technical standards for accessibility in e-learning. It defined 
disability as ‘a mismatch between the needs of the learner and the 
education offered’. Accessibility is ‘the ability of the learning 
environment to adjust to the needs of all learners’ and is 
determined by ‘the flexibility of the education environment (with 
respect to presentation, control methods, access modality, and 
learner supports) and the availability of adequate alternative-but-
equivalent content and activities’ [7]. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
LAK '16, April 25 - 29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM.  
ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883946 



The term ‘accessibility’ is often used in the context of web design, 
and the W3C web standards body states, ‘Web accessibility means 
that people with disabilities can perceive, understand, navigate, 
and interact with the Web, and that they can contribute to the 
Web’ [18]. A design can be said to be accessible if it facilitates 
full interaction by all users, irrespective of the assistive 
technologies or access approaches that may be adopted by some.  

3.1 Disability flags and access profiles 
Key to the development of learning analytics for accessibility is 
knowledge of which students have declared a disability. This 
<disability flag> carries no additional information. However, data 
that many universities are required to collect and report enables 
the use of a richer data element, <disability type>. 
‘Disability type’ is medical-model based. The UK’s Higher 
Education Statistics Agency defines disability in relation to 12 
broad categories, including sight impairment, hearing impairment 
and dyslexia. These categories do not map meaningfully to 
disabled people’s functional requirements for interacting with web 
resources but may still be useful in terms of analytics. 
An alternative is the Access for All 3.0 Personal Needs and 
Preferences (PNP) specification developed within the IMS Global 
Learning Consortium, which went to public draft in September 
2012 [7]. This provides a candidate approach that could enable 
comprehensive profiles of individuals’ access approaches and 
assistive technologies to be stored within a user database. 
Disabled students could generate their own functional profiles, 
possibly with the help of disability advisors, by inputting their 
access approaches and requirements. These profiles would help in 
identifying accessibility problems and where and how they arise. 

3.2 The law and external standards 
Most developed countries now have legislation which impacts on 
the access of disabled people to education. These laws vary in 
nature from country to country. The UK, for example, has ‘anti-
discrimination legislation’ rather than ‘accessibility legislation’. 
This is the case in most developed countries, although the US has 
some accessibility legislation that is linked to public procurement. 
In the UK, the key current legislation is the Equality Act (2010) 
[5], which builds on other legislation, including the Disability 
Discrimination Act (2005). In essence, these require educational 
institutions not to discriminate against disabled students on the 
basis of their disabilities; to make ‘reasonable adjustments’ in 
order to meet disabled students’ needs in all aspects of their 
education, and to anticipate the needs of disabled students. 
The law is understandably not specific about what the phrase 
‘reasonable adjustments’ means in terms of accessibility of online 
offerings. However, it is widely accepted that the Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 recommended by the W3C 
are the baseline if a case is taken to court [19]. These guidelines 
are targeted at web developers and cover technical accessibility. 
In addition, accessibility in e-learning should include accessibility 
of learning design and the pedagogically appropriate use of 
alternative formats, which may employ diverse media. 
Accessibility should be built into everyday practices throughout 
the product lifecycle from conception and specification, through 
development, to delivery and maintenance. Recognising this, the 
British Standards Institute developed BS 8878: 2010 Web 
Accessibility Code of Practice [2]. This facilitates a pragmatic 
application of WCAG 2.0 within a process-based approach. 

4. ANALYTICS FOR ACCESSIBILITY  
Researchers investigating drop-out rates of campus-based students 
have drawn on institutional records and survey data when 
developing models of persistence and attrition [1, 13]. Similar 
approaches have been used to predict drop-out rates on online 
courses [8, 15]. Student attributes, skills and contexts have been 
used to develop predictive models [12]. Researchers can now 
make use of online interaction data in order to identify links 
between participation in various activities, rates of participation at 
various stages of the course, and drop-out rates [9]. 
Little of this work has taken disability into account, although age, 
gender, ethnicity, family background and study habits have all 
been considered [1, 13]. This is a significant omission, because 
prominent theoretical models of academic attrition imply that 
disability could be a significant variable if it results in students 
feeling they do not fit in, or that their studies are putting too much 
pressure on their resources and well-being [1, 13]. 
Retention issues are key institutional drivers for the adoption of 
learning analytics. If disabled students encounter critical elements 
or required modes of study that are not accessible to them, then 
this will impact negatively on their chances of passing a course 
and may lead to them dropping out before the final assessment.  

5. DESCRIPTION OF DATASET 
In order to explore whether learning analytics can be used to 
identify modules with such accessibility deficits, a large dataset 
was compiled and analysed, in a project focused on the retention 
of STEM (science, maths, engineering and technology) students.  
This dataset contained data from OU modules (units requiring 300 
or 600 study hours). It included five years of data (2009-2013) 
from two OU faculties, Maths Computing & Technology (MCT) 
and Science, covering all module presentations for which 
complete data were available (N=1,338). For each module 
presentation, numbers of students declaring a disability (‘disabled 
students’) or not (‘non-disabled students’) were recorded, as were 
percentages of both groups completing and passing. Students were 
considered to have completed a module if they submitted the final 
summative assessment. Pass and completion rates of disabled and 
non-disabled students could then be compared.  
Overall, analysis of the dataset indicated that the OU had 
improved the accessibility of its modules over time. Only three 
modules in the dataset that were presented after 2012 showed the 
completion rate of disabled students to be markedly poorer than 
that of non-disabled students (indicated by an odds ratio of >2.95). 

6. RESULTS 
6.1 Results of quantitative analysis 
The average completion rate for non-disabled students in the 
dataset was 75.3% and for disabled students it was 69.5%. 
However, many factors other than disability impact on completion 
rates. The objective of our analytics approach was to identify 
modules in which accessibility was a dominant factor in 
determining the completion rates of disabled students and then to 
focus remedial efforts on those modules. Table 1 shows that in 
68% of module presentations a greater proportion of non-disabled 
students completed the module than disabled students. However, 
it might be expected that non-disabled students would do better 
than disabled students, so it is perhaps more significant to note 
that in 30.6% of cases the converse was true. The range of 
differences in completion rate (non-disabled students minus 
disabled students) was from -49.5 percentage points to 96.0 
percentage points. 



Table 1: Rates at which disabled and non-disabled  
students complete modules 

 No. module presentations 
% of module 
presentations 

Higher % of non-disabled 
students complete 923 68.0% 

Higher % of disabled 
students complete 415 30.6% 

Equal % students 
complete 19 1.4% 

The more extreme results were mainly found in module 
presentations with a low population of disabled students. This 
effect of population size can be illustrated with an example. If a 
module has only two disabled students and one drops out then the 
completion rate is 50%. If the same module has many non-
disabled students, their completion rate will be very close to the 
mean of the course, say 70%. This results in a difference of 20 
percentage points. However, this difference would be due to one 
student dropping out, not necessarily because of accessibility. 
To avoid this distortion, in subsequent analysis modules with 
fewer than 25 disabled students were not considered, reducing the 
number of module presentations in the dataset to 668. 

Table 2: Rates at which disabled and non-disabled  
students complete modules (modules > 25 disabled students) 

 No. module presentations 
% of module 
presentations 

Higher % of non-disabled 
students complete 537 80.4% 

Higher % of disabled 
students complete 129 19.3% 

Equal % students 
complete 2 0.3% 

In this modified dataset, differences in completion rate on a 
module (non-disabled students minus disabled students) ranged 
from -22.1% points to 35.0 percentage points.  
Initial analysis considered differences between the percentage 
completion of these groups for each module presentation. This 
approach was refined by the use of odds ratios, a standard 
statistical approach that enables comparisons to be made across 
different modules when the underlying phenomenon varies.  
When using odds ratios, if the probability of the members of 
Group 1 achieving an outcome is p, with 0 indicating it will never 
happen and 1 indicating it is certain to happen, then the odds of 
this are p/(1 ? p). If the probability of the members of Group 2 
exhibiting that outcome is q, then the odds of this are q/(1 ? q). 
The odds ratio is the ratio between these odds [p/(1 ? p)]/[q/(1 ? 
q)], which equals [p(1 ? q)]/[q(1 ? p)]. Odds ratios vary from 0 
(when p = 0 or q = 1) to infinity (when p = 1 or q = 0). An odds 
ratio of 1 means there is no difference in the odds of the two 
groups’ members achieving the outcome (when p = q). An odds 
ratio less than 1 means the members of Group 1 are less likely to 
achieve the outcome than the members of Group 2; while an odds 
ratio greater than 1 means the members of Group 1 are more 
likely to exhibit the outcome than are the members of Group 2 
Odds ratios are often used to generalise from a sample population. 
Here, though, we calculated and compared the odds ratio for all 
students on each module presentation, classifying non-disabled 
students as Group 1 and disabled students as Group 2. The odds 
ratio is therefore >1 when non-disabled students perform better 

than disabled students on a module. The larger the odds ratio is, 
the greater the disparity between the two groups.  
We suggest that when the odds ratios are above a certain threshold 
they indicate a module is presenting accessibility issues that are 
significantly impacting on the performance of disabled students. 
The plot in Figure 1 was used to set a threshold of 3.0. Although 
the plot is difficult to interpret at this scale, the main thing to note 
is that most data points lie between 1.0 and 3.0. Working with an 
odds ratio of 3.0 was therefore considered likely to filter out cases 
where factors other than disability would have the most 
significant effects on student performance.  
This approach points to cases where significant accessibility 
issues may exist; it says nothing about what those accessibility 
barriers might be. It can therefore be used to decide where 
accessibility reviews should be carried out. This has the advantage 
of focusing the limited accessibility expertise available across a 
university on the modules where it is likely to have most impact.  

Figure 1: Distribution plot of odds ratios of completion rates; 
each dot represents a module presentation (distributed along 

the x axis in no particular order); y axis is the odds ratio 

6.2 Comparison with qualitative data 
In order to contextualise this quantitative approach to identifying 
possible accessibility deficits, qualitative data were also analysed 
in a small-scale investigation.  
At the end of each module presentation, OU students are asked to 
complete a survey that explores their study experience. This 
survey includes three opportunities to provide free-text comments. 
Since 2012, the survey includes a question about the experience of 
disabled students, so this section of our research focused on 
module presentations that had used this form of the survey. 
Free-text survey responses from six module presentations were 
analysed qualitatively, with the focus on responses from students 
who had declared a disability. For three of the sample modules 
quantitative analysis had indicated accessibility challenges; for 
three modules no problems had been identified.  

6.3 Results of qualitative analysis 
Table 4 summarises the qualitative analysis of survey responses 
(the coder had not seen results of the quantitative analysis). 
Ranking of the selected modules for accessibility on the basis of 
free-text survey responses by disabled students was markedly 
different to the ranking by odds ratio of completion rates 
comparing disabled and non-disabled students. Reasons for this 
difference, and its implications, are discussed in the next section. 
 

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

5.0

6.0



Table 3: Modules selected for qualitative analysis ranked in 
descending order of odds ratio.  

M represents a mathematics module and S a science module  

Module 
Code 

Disabled 

No Yes 

Total No. 
% 

complete No. 
% 

complete 
Odds 
Ratios 

M1 247 221 67.0 26 26.9 5.517 

S2 145 118 71.2 27 44.4 3.096 

S1 230 199 70.9 31 45.2 2.954 

S3 291 229 64.2 62 53.2 1.578 

M2 320 282 70.2 38 63.2 1.372 

S4 148 117 76.1 31 71.0 1.301 

The selection criteria used to obtain this sample (Table 3) were: 

• Modules were at Level 3, comparable to modules taken 
by students in the final year of undergraduate study 

• Presentation had at least 25 disabled students registered 
• Field trips and summer schools (face-to-face lab work) 

were excluded 
• Modules thought to include significant accessibility 

barriers had a completion rate odds ratio of >2.95 
• Three modules, selected from many, thought to be non-

problematic from an accessibility perspective had a 
completion rate odds ratio of < 1.6. 

Unfortunately, for three of the selected modules the data were 
incomplete because an unrelated data-cleansing process had 
caused the over-writing of some responses. 

Table 4: Relative ranking of modules by access issues reported 
in survey responses (with summary of reasons for the 

ranking) compared with ranking by odds ratio 

Module 
Code 

Summary of Reason for 
Ranking from Survey Analysis 

Survey 
analysis 
ranking 

(worst = 1) 

Ranking by 
odds ratio 
completion 
(worst = 1) 

M2 

Two-thirds of students with 
declared disabilities had 
complaints that could relate to 
their disabilities.  

1 5 

S1 
Difficult for dyslexics to follow, 
videos lacking subtitles, no 
alternative to using website.  

2 3 

S4 Incomplete data. Lack of printed material was a problem for some 3 6 

S3 

Incomplete data. One had 
problems with online copy. 
However, three noted other 
options were available. 

4 4 

M1 Data incomplete. No problems identified. 5 1 

S2 No problems AND students were very positive. 6 2 

7. DISCUSSION 
Comparative analysis of completion rates between disabled and 
non-disabled students, over a large set of module presentations, 
confirmed that disabled students are less likely to complete a 
module than non-disabled students. However, it revealed wide 
variation between modules. Identifying modules with the greatest 
disparity between performance of disabled and non-disabled 
students indicates where significant accessibility challenges lie. 
This approach was not valid when the numbers of disabled 
students on a module was low. We suggested that a minimum of 
25 disabled students on a module was appropriate. This figure 
halved the number of modules analysed in this study and limits 
the contexts in which the approach would be applicable. In the 
context of a large university like the OU, this approach would 
identify the accessibility deficits that impact on a significant 
majority of disabled students. At many universities, far fewer 
courses would have sufficient disabled student numbers to make 
the approach valid.  However, one context in which we suggest 
that it would have particular utility and validity is that of massive 
open online courses (MOOCs).  
Disabled students do raise issues relating to module accessibility 
when surveyed. These include difficulty with reading material on 
screen, and lack of subtitles on videos from external providers. 
However, we run into a number of problems if we rely on end-of-
module surveys to reveal where accessibility problems may be 
significantly impacting on disabled students’ learning: 
(1) Those who are most profoundly affected by accessibility 

deficits and decide to withdraw are unlikely to complete an 
end-of-module survey.  

(2) Student responses do not align with drop out rates (Table 4).  
(3) Problems reported by disabled students are not necessarily 

the main problems.  
(4) On modules with a high drop out rate, disabled students may 

report no problems. 
(5) ‘Declared disability’ is a very broad classification. A 

problem that is insurmountable for blind students may have 
no effect on others who are hard-of-hearing or dyslexic. 

Analytics provide another way of approaching the problem of 
identifying where major accessibility deficits lie. First, we identify 
quantitatively the modules with disproportionately high drop out 
rates of disabled students. Having done that, we can (in future) 
carry out critical learning path analysis of those modules, and 
compare the critical learning paths of disabled students and non-
disabled students. This potentially enables us to pinpoint where 
the accessibility problems lie that are really impacting on learning. 

8. ONGOING AND FUTURE WORK 
8.1 Analytics to support disabled students 
A major theme in learning analytics has been to facilitate the 
offering of targeted support to the students most in need of it. 
Declared disability could have significant utility in this process. If 
tutor dashboards, when highlighting those at risk, also identified 
which students had declared a disability, this could prompt an 
enquiry as to whether this disability, or accessibility issues with 
the course, were having a significant impact on performance. A 
tutor could then support the student to make use of appropriate 
access approaches. This could trigger a negotiation about 
reasonable adjustments or prompt the student to obtain support 
from specialist disabled student support services. 
This could be done at different levels, depending on the use of 
such dashboards and the levels of information collected and made 



available to the learning analytics system. If the learning analytics 
system just uses the <disability flag> then only a basic prompt 
that this student has declared a disability is possible. However, if 
the system models disabled students’ needs and preferences for 
access approaches then it is possible to point both tutor and 
student to more specifically appropriate guidance.  

8.2 Analytics to reveal critical learning paths  
Students working on an online system can typically choose how 
and when they access the learning materials provided. Some 
learning activities are inevitably more critical for success than 
others. Machine learning methods can be applied to historical 
module data in order to discover which types of activity are 
important for a particular module at a particular time. For 
example, being inactive in a forum in the first week of a module 
presentation can be implicated in lower performance in module A, 
yet have no impact in module B. Through mapping the activity 
space of a module and identifying the pathways of successful and 
unsuccessful students through the activities, it is possible to 
identify critical activities along the pathway to success and, 
conversely, to identify strategies that are not successful.  
Current work at the OU (building on [15]) represents multiple 
student paths through a module as a probabilistic Markov chain of 
independent transitions between one activity on the virtual 
learning environment (VLE) and another. A graphical 
representation of the Markov chain for a given module can 
highlight how many students made a transition between certain 
activities and how this impacted on their final outcome. This 
shows the critical pathways to success. 
Currently, this work is being investigated at the level of VLE 
‘activity type’. If any critical activities pose accessibility 
problems, then this could limit progress for some disabled 
students. Comparing pathways of successful and unsuccessful 
disabled students with the pathways of others could highlight 
problems with a module’s activities. In addition, the accessibility 
of activities that fall on the pathways of successful students will 
have more impact on the success of disabled students than 
activities that appear to have little impact on student success. Thus 
this approach could be used to prioritise remedial accessibility 
work on a module. 

9. CONCLUSIONS 
Disabled students experience a wide range of challenges in their 
study. Educational institutions need to extend accessibility of their 
courses to reduce those challenges. This paper has shown that an 
analytics approach based on comparative analysis of completion 
rates between disabled and non-disabled students could identify 
where accessibility deficits are having real impact on learning and 
thus focus remedial attention. Based on ongoing work on critical 
learning path analysis, the paper has outlined how analytics could 
be used to identify module components that are presenting 
accessibility challenges. Where learning analytics dashboards are 
being used to support students directly and enable their tutors to 
support them, these approaches could be extended to target 
effective support for disabled students. It is hoped that this paper 
will stimulate others involved in the research, development and 
roll-out of learning analytics to work towards realising their 
potential to meet the needs of disabled students. 
 

10. REFERENCES 
[1] Bean, J. P. & Metzner, B. S., A conceptual model of 

nontraditional undergraduate student attrition. Review of 
Educational Research, 55, 4, (1985), 485-540. 

[2] British Standards International, BS 8878:2010 Web 
Accessibility – Code of Practice. 2010. Available from: 
http://www.bsi-publications.com.  

[3] Campbell, J. P. & Oblinger, D. G., Academic Analytics. 
Educause, 2007.  

[4] Dawson, S., Gaševi?, D., Siemens, G., & Joksimovic, S. 
(2014). Current state and future trends: a citation analysis of 
the learning analytics field. LAK 14, Indianapolis, USA. 

[5] HMSO, The Equality Act 2010. Available from 
http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/equalities/equality-act/.  

[6] IMS Global Learning Consortium, IMS AccessForAll Meta-
data Overview. 2004. http://www.imsglobal.org/accessibility. 

[7] IMS Global Learning Consortium, Access for All (AfA), 
Version 3.0 Specification, Public Draft 1.0. 2012. Available 
from http://www.imsglobal.org/accessibility/index.html  

[8] Morris, L.V., Finnegan, C.L. and Wu, S.-S., Tracking student 
behavior, persistence, and achievement in online courses. 
The Internet and Higher Education, 8, 3, (2005), 221-231. 

[9] Nistor, N. & Neubauer, K., From participation to dropout: 
quantitative participation patterns in online university 
courses. Computers & Education, 55, 2, (2010), 663-672. 

[10] Richardson, J.T.E. (2009): The academic attainment of 
students with disabilities in UK higher education, Studies in 
Higher Education, 34:2, 123-137 

[11] Richardson, J.T.E., Course completion and attainment in 
disabled students taking courses with The Open University 
UK. Open Learning, 25, 2, (2010), 81-94. 

[12] Romero, C. and Ventura, S., Educational data mining: a 
survey from 1995 to 2005. Expert Systems with Applications, 
33, 1, (2007), 135-146. 

[13] Tinto, V., Colleges as communities: taking research on 
student persistence seriously. The Review of Higher 
Education, 21, 2, (1997), 167-177. 

[14] UPIAS, Fundamental Principles of Disability. Union of 
Physically Impaired against Segregation, London, 1976.  

[15] Wolff, A., Zdrahal, Z., Nikolov, A. & Pantucek, M. (2013) 
Improving retention: predicting at-risk students by analysing 
clicking behaviour in a virtual learning environment, LAK13, 
Leuven, Belgium. 

[16] World Health Organization, International classification of 
impairments, disabilities, and handicaps. WHO, Geneva, 
1980.  

[17] World Health Organization, International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health. WHO, Geneva, 2001. 

[18] World Wide Web Consortium, Introduction to Web 
Accessibility. 2005. Available at http://www.w3.org/WAI/  

[19] World Wide Web Consortium, Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines 2.0. 2008. http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG/. 



