
An Analysis Framework for Collaborative Problem 
Solving in Practice-based Learning Activities:  

A Mixed-method Approach 
 

Mutlu Cukurova1, Katerina Avramides1, Daniel Spikol2, Rose Luckin1, Manolis Mavrikis1 

1London Knowledge Lab, UCL Institute of Education, University College London, London, United Kingdom 
2 Faculty of Technology and Society, Dept. of  Media Technology, Malmö University, Malmö, Sweden 

1{m.cukurova, k.avramides, r.luckin, m.mavrikis}@ioe.ac.uk, daniel.spikol@mah.se 

ABSTRACT 
Systematic investigation of the collaborative problem solving 
process in open-ended, hands-on, physical computing design tasks 
requires a framework that highlights the main process features, 
stages and actions that then can be used to provide ‘meaningful’ 
learning analytics data. This paper presents an analysis framework 
that can be used to identify crucial aspects of the collaborative 
problem solving process in practice-based learning activities. We 
deployed a mixed-methods approach that allowed us to generate 
an analysis framework that is theoretically robust, and 
generalizable. Additionally, the framework is grounded in data 
and hence applicable to real-life learning contexts. This paper 
presents how our framework was developed and how it can be 
used to analyse data. We argue for the value of effective analysis 
frameworks in the generation and presentation of learning 
analytics for practice-based learning activities. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
• Applied computing~Computer-assisted instruction    
• Applied computing~Collaborative learning    
• Applied computing~Computer-managed instruction 

General Terms 
Measurement, Design, Experimentation, Human Factors. 

Keywords 
Collaborative learning, problem solving, practice-based learning, 
analysis framework 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Learning Analytics (LA) rely upon effective frameworks that 
drive the analysis of data in a manner that answers the questions 
posed by researchers and educators. These questions can be 
diverse, as can the educational practices that are subject to 
analysis. We are particularly interested in collaborative problem 
solving processes in practice-based learning activities. Practice-
based learning activities differ considerably in what they ask 
students to do and what they are trying to teach. In the research 

study reported here, we focus on open-ended, hands-on, physical 
computing design tasks. This type of practice-based learning 
activity is commonly used to improve collaborative problem 
solving processes [13], which in turn improve learning in this type 
of practice-based learning activities. 
Practice-based learning activities have the potential to help 
educators to achieve high tier institutional and policy goals such 
as developing 21st century skills in STEM subjects at scale. They 
are becoming increasingly popular in both secondary and post-
secondary learning institutions, particularly after the introduction 
of the ‘Makers Movement’ [3]. However, 21st century skills 
including collaborative problem solving skills are complex and 
non-linear in nature. Hence, although practice-based learning 
activities are widely recognised as an essential aspect of teaching 
these skills in STEM subjects, both by educators and by 
researchers [11]; our understanding of practice-based learning still 
remains scant and there is still little agreement on how it should 
be used effectively and how it should be supported [1].  
LA is introducing a number of new techniques and frameworks 
for studying learning in general, nonetheless practice-based 
learning activities are one of those educational areas to which 
learning analytics have yet to contribute significantly [18]. 
Systematic investigation of the collaborative problem solving 
process in practice-based learning activities requires a framework 
that highlights the main process features, stages and actions. 
Those identified process actions and stages can then be used to 
provide ‘meaningful’ LA data. The main purpose of this paper is 
to provide such a framework.  

2. ANALYSIS FRAMEWORKS IN LA 
The development of appropriate frameworks for analysing 
students’ engagement processes is a key aspect of research in LA 
[2, 7, 8, 10, 15]. Designing and validating analysis frameworks for 
LA is a challenging task and requires expertise in multiple 
research domains including educational design, educational 
psychology, human-computer interaction and computer sciences. 
There appear to be two fundamental approaches to the 
development of analysis frameworks in the literature. The first 
approach starts with a theoretical model. Researchers derive a 
theoretical model of the process they are investigating, either from 
the previous literature or from expert opinions (Delphi Method), 
and deploy it to data generated from real world contexts to 
validate, reshape or refute it (see for instance [5]). This approach 
has the drawback of overlooking the essential aspects of what 
makes a learning process unique. The second approach is to use a 
grounded-theory approach. In a grounded-theory approach, 
researchers attempt to ignore all prior assumptions and categories 
and to describe the process as it emerges from the data (see for 
instance [6]).  However, this approach could lead to generation of 
very data-specific frameworks, which cannot be used in other 

 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
permissions@acm.org 
LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom ?  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04…$15.00 ?  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883900 



contexts. We believe, a mixed methods approach (see for instance 
[10]) could lead to more effective analysis frameworks that 
highlight the main process features, stages and actions of a 
learning process. They can be both theory-driven and therefore 
broad enough to observe learning processes on the basis of 
theoretical assumptions, and data-driven and therefore grounded 
enough to be applicable to the real-life learning contexts. 
 

2.1 Development Process of the Analysis 
Framework 
Here we present the methodology we adopted to develop a mixed-
methods analysis framework for the collaborative problem solving 
process in practice-based learning. There are three main stages: 
identification of the theory-driven framework; adaptation of the 
theoretical framework to fit the research purposes and merging the 
fine-grained actions from the data to the adapted theoretical 
framework (figure 1). 
 

 
Figure 1: Three-stage development process 

 

2.1.1 Identification of a theory-driven framework 
from the literature 
We started with a framework that was developed by the OECD to 
assess collaborative problem solving competence [12]. This 
framework met our requirements, because it is a rare attempt to 
merge collaboration and problem solving skills in one framework. 
The approach taken by the OECD also takes into account a very 
broad educational context, because their focus is upon the 
evaluation of knowledge and skills at an international comparison 
level. 
The OECD defines collaborative problem solving competency as 
“the capacity of an individual to effectively engage in a process 
whereby two or more agents attempt to solve a problem by 
sharing the understanding and effort required to come to a 
solution and pooling their knowledge, skills and efforts to reach 
that solution” [12, p.6]. The definition identifies three core 
competencies particularly related to collaboration and four 
competencies particularly related to problem solving. 
Competencies related to collaboration: 1. Establishing and 
maintaining shared understanding; 2. Taking appropriate action to 
solve the problem; 3. Establishing and maintaining team 
organization. Competencies related to problem solving: 1. 
Exploring and Understanding; 2. Representing and Formulating; 
3. Planning and Executing; 4. Monitoring and Reflecting. These 
competencies are then used as dimensions in the OECD’s 
assessment framework for collaborative problem solving (see 
Table 1). 
 
 

Table 1: Matrix of Collaborative Problem Solving for PISA 
 (1) Establishing 

and maintaining 
shared 
understanding 

(2) Taking 
appropriate action 
to solve the 
problem 

(3) Establishing and 
maintaining team 
organization 

 

(A) Exploring and 
Understanding 

(A1) Discovering 
perspectives and 
abilities of team 
members 

(A2) Discovering 
the type of 
collaborative 
interaction to solve 
the problem, along 
with goals 

(A3) Understanding 
roles to solve 
problem 

 

 

(B) Representing 
and Formulating 

(B1) Building a 
shared 
representation and 
negotiating the 
meaning of the 
problem (common 
ground) 

 

B2) Identifying and 
describing tasks to 
be completed 

(B3) Describe roles 
and team 
organization 
(communication 
protocol/rules of 
engagement)  

 

(C) Planning and 
Executing 

(C1) 
Communicating 
with team members 
about the actions to 
be/ being performed 

 

(C2) Enacting plans 

(C3) Following rules 
of engagement, (e.g., 
prompting other team 
members to perform 
their tasks.) 

 

(D) Monitoring 
and Reflecting 

(D1) Monitoring 
and repairing the 
shared 
understanding 

(D2) Monitoring 
results of actions 
and evaluating 
success in solving 
the problem 

(D3) Monitoring, 
providing feedback 
and adapting the 
team organization 
and roles 

2.1.2 Adaptation of the OECD framework to fit our 
research purposes 
The framework was originally developed for assessment purposes. 
However, it does not meet the requirements for analysing the 
process of collaborative problem solving, because it does not 
include the component of knowledge deficiency.  

Table 2: Combined Matrix that merges PBL and CPS 
concepts adapted from PISA 

 (1) Establishing and 
maintaining shared 

understanding 

(2) Taking 
appropriate action 

to solve the problem 

(3) Establishing and 
maintaining team 

organization 

(A) Identifying 
facts 

(A1) Discovering 
perspectives and 
abilities of team 

members, making 
knowledge explicit 

(A2) Discovering the 
type of collaborative 
interaction to solve 
the problem, along 

with goals 

(A3) Understanding 
roles to solve problem 

(B) 
Representing 
and 
Formulating 

(B1) Building a 
shared representation 
and negotiating the 

meaning of the 
problem (common 

ground) 

(B2) Identifying and 
describing tasks to be 

completed 

(B3) Describe roles 
and team organization 

(communication 
protocol/rules of 

engagement) 

(C) Generating 
Hypotheses 

(C1) Critically 
analyzing the problem 

representation 

(C2) Generating and 
Communicating 

potential solution 
paths 

(C3) Present 
Hypothesis, encourage 
feedback from others 
and offer feedback on 

others’ hypotheses 

(D) Planning 
and Executing 

(D1) Communicating 
with team members 
about the actions to 
be/ being performed 

(D2) Enacting plans (D3) Following rules 
of engagement, (e.g., 
prompting other team 
members to perform 

their tasks.) 

(E) Identifying 
Knowledge and 
Skill 
Deficiencies 

(E1) Comparing the 
team’s knowledge and 

skills with the 
proposed actions 

(E2) Identifying and 
specifying individual 

deficiencies 

(E3) Specification of 
team deficiencies and 
their relationship to 
proposed problem 

solution 

(F) Monitoring, 
Reflecting and 
Applying 

(F1) Monitoring and 
repairing the shared 

understanding 

(F2) Monitoring 
results of actions and 
evaluating success in 
solving the problem 

(F3) Monitoring, 
providing feedback 

and adapting the team 
organization and roles 

 

IdentificationIdentification

AdaptationAdaptation

MergingMerging



Knowledge deficiency is an important aspect of the problem 
solving process [4]. To address both the assessment and the 
tuition aspects of the collaborative problem solving process, we 
adapted and integrated the knowledge deficiency element of 
Hmelo-Silver (2004)’s tuition framework into the OECD’s 
assessment framework (Please see table 2). A detailed discussion 
of this adaptation process as well as its implications were 
discussed in a recent research conference [8]. 

2.1.3 Merging the data-driven fine-grained actions 
of collaborative problem solving 
A multi-step qualitative methodology was used, taking into 
account the procedures and techniques developed in qualitative 
content analysis methods [17]. Our dataset consisted of video 
recordings from two different events, 
a) A Hackathon event in which three groups of five secondary 
school students (aged 14-15 years) were assigned to work on an 
open-ended, hands-on project using physical computing (Arduino 
modules1), 
b) A workshop event in which two groups of adult pairs worked 
on two different open-ended, hands-on physical computing 
projects using an Arduino-like kit (SAM Labs2). 
First, fine-grained actions from the data are identified. These were 
observable actions that occurred during the collaborative problem 
solving process. 31 fine-grained actions were identified. To 
validate these actions, two coders, applied these 31 actions to a 
different set of data collected from the same event. This procedure 
was suggested as a way of testing the validity of actions generated 
with a grounded theory approach by Mayring [9] as cited in Meier 
et al. [10]. Where there was disagreement, the researchers 
discussed the data and revised the categorisations accordingly. 
Then, the emerging actions were assigned to the coordinates of 
the theory-driven framework previously developed. First the fine-
grained actions were assigned to three core competencies 
particularly related to collaboration, and then they were assigned 
to six competencies particularly related to problem solving. 
Merging those two activities resulted with table 3. 
We argue that the mixed methods approach to generating analysis 
frameworks is a productive one. It helps to generate frameworks, 
which are theoretically robust, and generalizable while being 
grounded in data and applicable to real-life learning contexts. The 
real value of this framework (table 3) is that it has observable 
actions as its codes rather than broad definitions. Such broad 
definitions are hard to identify, track and interpret in data analyses 
both for human annotators and to a greater extent for machines, 
which makes them hard to use in learning analytics research. 
The analysis framework has been generated as part of a bigger 
research project and our next step is to apply this framework at 
scale using data collected from practice-based learning activities. 
The goal is to observe if there are any fundamental differences in 
different groups of students. Once we establish that machine 
collected data correlates with the human analysis of the 
collaborative problem solving process, we plan to use the 
Learning Analytics System (LAS) we design to compare 
successful students to novice ones, and STEM experts to STEM 
students in order to map which actions and stages of the 
collaborative problem solving process differ for those different 
groups. We aim to use this information to generate visualisations 
                                                                 
1 https://www.arduino.cc/ 
2 https://samlabs.me/ 

to support the collaborative problem solving process in open-
ended, hands-on physical computing design tasks. It is important 
to make it clear here that we do not hope to provide a measure of 
determination but a way of effectively supporting practice-based 
learning activities in STEM teaching. In this sense we see learning 
analytics as a means of seeking to “augment human intellect” [14] 
rather than define it. 

Table 3: Combined Matrix that merges fine-grained actions 
and theoretically suggested stages 

3. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
WITH THE FRAMEWORK 
As has been mentioned, the framework was created in the context 
of a larger EU project X (http://blinded.review), which is 
commissioned by the EC 7th Framework Programme. The overall 
aim of the project is to develop learning analytics tools for hands-
on, open-ended STEM learning activities using the Arduino 
platform.  Within the project we have generated tools that can 
detect some of the fine-grained actions in the analysis framework. 
Given the complexity of the collaborative problem-solving 
process even at the fine-grained level identified in our analysis 
framework, we cannot automatically track each of those actions 
with the current technology. However, we can automatically track 
some of the fine-grained actions, which are presented in this 
section.  
 

 (1) Establishing and 
maintaining shared 
understanding 

(2) Taking 
appropriate 
action to solve the 
problem 

(3) Establishing 
and maintaining 
team 
organization 

(A) 
Identifying 

facts 

(A1) Vocalizing 
knowledge; Confirming 
shared understanding; 

Communicating regarding 
an answer to a question; 

Asking questions to verify 
a suggested solution; 

presenting skills 

(A2) Identifying a 
problem (a 

situation which 
stops/hampers 

students from the 
natural progression 

of the practice-
based activity) 

 
 

(A3) Confirming 
the actions to be 
taken, engaging 

with rules 
 

(B) 
Representing 

and 
Formulating 

(B1) Sharing the identified 
problem with other 

teammates; Explaining an 
hypothesis/suggestion in 

detail 

(B2) 
Communicating 
about actions to 

take 

(B3) Assigning 
roles to team 
mates; Giving 

responsibilities to 
team mates 

 
(C) 

Generating 
Hypotheses 

 
(C1) Critically analyzing a 

problem; Critically 
analyzing a suggestion 

(C2) Suggesting a 
solution to a 

problem; 
Hypothesizing 
regarding the 

source of problem 

(C3) Suggesting 
an improved 
version of an 
hypothesis 

suggested by 
others 

 
 
 

(D) Planning 
and 

Executing 

 
 
 

(D1) Negotiating on 
actions to take; Approving 

a suggested solution 

 
 
 

(D2) Taking 
actions to progress 

(D3) Prompting 
other team 
members to 

perform their 
tasks; Taking 

actions related to 
suggestions of 

other teammates 

(E) 
Identifying 
Knowledge 
and Skill 

Deficiencies 

(E1) Identifying individual 
deficiencies 

(E2) Making 
knowledge or skill 
deficiency explicit 

(E3) Identifying a 
team mistake 

 
(F) 

Monitoring, 
Reflecting 

and Applying 

(F1) Verifying what each 
other knows; Asking 

questions regarding the 
actions being taken; 
Observing an agreed 
action being taken; 

Observing the attempts of 
another teammate to solve 

a problem 

(F2) Testing a 
solution to check 

its validity; 
Reflecting on 

previous actions; 
Correcting simple 
mistakes of others 

(F3) Warning 
teammates 
regarding a 

possible mistake 



3.1 Learning Analytics System (LAS) 
The LAS collects data from both ambient and live sources. The 
ambient collection of data includes a computer vision system 
integrated in specially designed furniture. The learning 
environment is designed to foster collaboration and includes an 
integrated screen and round shape to allow people to share and 
work together.  A new Arduino electronics platform with plug-and 
play electrical components, and visual programming tool has been 
developed to allow learners to more easily and build and program 
artifacts. The system collects what components are plugged in and 
how the students manipulate the programming environment. A 
lightweight mobile application has been developed to allow 
learners to plan, document, and reflect on their projects with text 
and multimedia. The mobile system also allows teachers to mark 
critical incidents, and researchers to time stamp the different 
stages of the learners project, based on the framework. This on the 
fly first round of coding provides a foundation for the hand coding 
of the video documentation post activity. A set of “sentiment” 
buttons has been developed with thundercloud and sunshine icons 
to allow the students to mark critical events in their activities. The 
system is seen below in figure 2. The live data will provide the 
self-declared data from students and teachers including the cycle 
of planning, documenting, and reflecting through the mobile 
system. The computer vision system and the log files of the 
Arduino software collect the ambient data. This data set includes 
the capture of objects, the positions of people, arm movement, 
faces and audio levels from the vision system; and from the 
Arduino the log files of components are collected as are the 
manipulations in the visual programming platform. In table 4, the 
detailed types of data collected, the instruments of collection, the 
type of events, the description, the extraction methods as well as 
fine-grained actions we aim to track are summarised. 

 
Figure 2: LAS in action 

The LAS is now up and running, and the first round of trials with 
learners are being conducted. The framework presented in this 
research paper is being used as a guide to design the algorithms 
for processing and visualising the data. 

4. DISCUSSION 
The analysis framework we generated offers a flexible approach 
to the analysis of data collected regarding the collaborative 
problem solving process in practice-based learning activities. 
Although this type of analysis usually needs to be completed by 
humans, we see our framework as an initial step to generate useful 
analysis frameworks for data collected and analysed by a 
machine. At this point we make the distinction between 
frameworks that can only be completed by humans as we strive to 
understand how learning happens and those employed in data 
analysis by a machine. However, this does not mean that they do 
not contribute to our understanding of such learning processes.  

Table 4: The detailed types of data collected, the instruments of collection, the type of events, description, the extraction methods, 
and the codes 

  

Data Collector Computer Vision System Arduino IDE (Visual Electronics 
Platform) 

Mobile System Sentiment Buttons Video Capture 

Types of Data 
/Events 

DATA: Shared Gaze, Body Closeness, 
hand tracking, object manipulation, 
motion around the special furniture 
and audio levels 
EVENTS: people and objects 

DATA: Number of components and 
inputs 
EVENTS: Arduino modules and 
codes 

DATA: Number of posts, 
transitions between activities 
EVENTS: self-documentation 

DATA and 
EVENTS: Critical 
Incidents 

Occasion of Codes/ 
Qualitative analysis 

Brief Description More granular details of who around 
the table and what their arms are 
doing, how close are they to each 
other, what are they are looking at, and 
the motion around the table -location 
of bodies, direction of gaze 

How students designed and built the 
tasks - types and number of 
components and manipulation in the 
IDE 

How did the students plan, 
document, and reflect on the task - 
Teacher critical incident marks 
Researcher coded activities 

Marking of critical 
incidents 

Coding Annotating 
moments on the 
video/audio 

Extraction 
Methods 

Frequency of hand movements  
Time spent looking at screen  
Time spent looking away 

Frequency of components plugged in 
Frequency of interactions with IDE 

Number of Mobile submits 
Number of words in text submitted 
Duration of different activities          
Content of text and multimedia 

Frequency and 
duration between 
types of incidents 

Rating of codes, Amount 
of time 

Types of Analysis Machine Machine Machine and human Machine and human Human 

Fine-grained 
actions aimed to 
be tracked 

(D2) Taking actions to progress, 
(D3) Prompting other team members 
to perform their tasks; Taking actions 
related to suggestions of other 
teammates, (F1) Observing an agreed 
action being taken; Observing the 
attempts of another teammate to solve 
a problem 

(A1) Presenting skills, (A2) 
Identifying a problem (a situation 
which stops/hampers students from 
the natural progression of the 
practice-based activity), (E2) Making 
knowledge or skill deficiency 
explicit, (E3) Identifying a team 
mistake 

(F1) Verifying what each other 
knows; Asking questions regarding 
the actions being taken; (F2) 
Testing a solution to check its 
validity; Reflecting on previous 
actions; Correcting simple mistakes 
of others, (F3) Warning teammates 
regarding a possible mistake, (E1) 
Identifying individual deficiencies, 
(C1) Critically analyzing a 
problem; Critically analyzing a 
suggestion, (C2) Suggesting a 
solution to a problem; 
Hypothesizing regarding the source 
of a problem, (C3) Suggesting an 
improved hypothesis  

(A2) Identifying a 
problem (a situation 
which stops/hampers 
students from the 
natural progression 
of the practice-based 
activity), (F3) 
Warning teammates 
regarding a possible 
mistake 

All identified fine-
grained actions 

 



In the same way that computers were not invented in order to 
make word-processing or the Internet possible, but once the space 
of possible computer applications was rendered accessible, design 
processes went into overdrive creating all the software we now 
rely on everyday, analysis frameworks for learning analytics and 
associated tools have the potential to lead to the production and 
use of effective technologies for teaching and learning. 
One possible criticism of our mixed-methods approach could be 
that there is a low possibility of researchers generating fine-
grained actions from the data while bracketing out all a priori 
assumptions and categories. This is obviously a much broader 
question than the scope of this research study and it relates to all 
research studies that use a grounded theory approach. It is clear to 
us that somehow, every observation is theory-driven. We 
recognize the difference between looking and identifying what 
one looks at. Whilst the first one is a physical action, the latter 
requires a theoretical framework and clearly the generation of 
fine-grained actions from data requires the identification of 
collaborative problem solving actions. However, our focus on the 
data-driven, fine-grained actions is particular to the observable 
actions of what we, as educators and researchers, think of as part 
of the collaborative problem solving process. 

5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper we present the development of an analysis 
framework for the collaborative problem solving process in 
practice-based learning activities (Table 3). We then, briefly 
present the learning analytics system we developed to collect data 
regarding the fine-grained actions and dimensions of collaborative 
learning processes from practice-based learning activities (Table 
4). We argue that the three-stage development process we 
describe in this paper is a useful one to generate analysis 
frameworks that can be used to identify crucial aspects of the 
learning process in practice-based learning activities. The stages, 
dimensions and fine-grained actions of our analysis framework 
can be used to provide ‘meaningful’ LA data. Although, the 
framework is generated in the context of practice-based learning 
environments, we believe the development process we generated 
can be used in different educational contexts particularly in face-
to-face learning environments where detecting and tracking 
student interactions is extremely challenging. Our next research 
aim is to apply this framework at scale and generate learning 
analytics data for teachers and students, which will support their 
teaching and learning process during practice-based activities.  

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This work was funded by the PELARS project (GA No. 619738) 
under the Seventh Framework Programme of the European 
Commission.  

REFERENCES 
[1] Abrahams, I., & Millar, R. (2008). Does practical work really 

work? A study of the effectiveness of practical work as a 
teaching and learning method in school science. International 
Journal of Science Education, 30(14), 1945-1969.  

[2] Gibson, A., Kitto, K., & Wills, J. (2014). A cognitive 
processing framework for learning analytics. Paper presented 
at the LAK'14 Proceedings of the Fourth International 
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge, New 
York. Doi: 10.1145/2567574.2567610 

[3] Halverson, E. R., & Sheridan, K. M. (2014). The Maker 
Movement in Education. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 
495-506. 

[4] Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based Learning: What 
and How do Students Learn. Educational Psychology Review, 
16(3). 

[5] Jarvela, S., & Hakkinen, P. (2003). The levels of web-based 
discussions: using perspective-taking theory as an analytical 
tool. Cognition in a digital world, 77-95. 

[6] Koschmann, T., Zemel, A., Conlee-Stevens, M., Young, N., 
Robbs, J., & Barnhart, A. (2003). Problematizing the Problem. 
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 37-46. 

 [7] Lee, Y. C. E., Chan, C. K. K., & van Aalst, J. (2006). 
Students assessing their own collaborative knowledge 
building. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 57-
87. 

[8] Luckin, R., Mavrikis, M., Avramides, K., & Cukurova, M. 
(2015). Analysing Project Based Learning Scenarios to inform 
the design of Learning Analytics: Learning from related 
concepts. Paper presented at the AIED2015 Artificial 
Intelligence in Education, Madrid. 

[9] Mayring, P. (2003). Qualitative content analysis. Foundations 
and techniques. Weinheim: Beltz. 

[10] Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme 
for assessing the quality of computer-supported collaboration 
process. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 63-
86. 

[11]  Millar, R. (2004). The role of practical work in the teaching 
and learning of science. High school science laboratories: 
Role and vision. 

[12] OECD. (2015). Draft Collaborative Problem Solving 
Framework. Retrieved from 
http://www.oecd.org/pisa/pisaproducts/Draft PISA 2015 
Collaborative Problem Solving Framework .pdf 

[13] Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to Collaborate: 
An instructional approach to promoting collaborative problem 
solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the 
Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241. 
DOI:10.1207/s15327809jls1402_2 

[14] Santos, J. L., Verbert, K., Govaerts, S., & Duval, E. (2011). 
Visualising PLE usage. Paper presented at the EFEPLE11 1st 
Workshop on Exploring the Fitness and Evolvability of 
Personal Learning Environments. 

[15] Scheffel, M., Drachsler, H., & Specht, M. (2015). Developing 
an Evaluation Framework of Quality Indicators for Learning 
Analytics. Paper presented at the LAK'15 Proceedings of the 
Fifth International Conference on Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge, New York. 

[16] Segal, J. W., Chipman, S. F., & Glaser, R. (2014). Thinking 
and Learning Skills (Vol. 1). London: Routledge. 

[17] Spannagel, C., Glaser-Zikuda, M., & Schroeder, U. (2005). 
Application of Qualitative Content Analysis in User-Program 
Interaction Research. FQS Forum: Qualitative Social 
Research, 6(2), 29. 

[18] Worsley, M., & Blikstein, P. (2014). Analyzing Engineering 
Design through the Lens of Computation. Journal of 
Learning Analytics, 1(2), 151-186.



