
LAK16 Workshop: Extending IMS Caliper AnalyticsTM  
with Learning Activity Profiles 

Anthony Whyte 
ITS, Teaching and Learning 

University of Michigan 
201 E Hoover, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109 

arwhyte@umich.edu 

Prashant Nayak 
Intellify Learning 

51 Melcher St, Boston, MA, 02210 
prashant@intellifylearning.com 

John Johnston 
ITS, Teaching and Learning 

University of Michigan 
201 E Hoover, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109 

johnpj@umich.edu 
 

ABSTRACT 
Educational institutions are evolving away from the one-
application-fits-all learning management system to a loosely 
connected digital learning ecosystem comprising diverse services 
that increasingly leverage data analytics to drive pedagogical 
innovation. Yet an ecosystem rich in services but lacking a 
common approach to measuring learning activity will find data 
collection, aggregation and analysis time-consuming and costly. 
The IMS Caliper AnalyticsTM specification addresses the need for 
data and semantic interoperability by providing an extensible 
information model, controlled vocabularies and an API for 
instrumenting learning applications and systems that log learning 
events.   However, many learning activities have yet to be 
modeled by the Caliper working group.  Engaging the SoLAR 
community directly in this effort will help ensure that the needs of 
researchers and other consumers of learning analytics data will 
inform future versions of the specification.  The LAK16 Caliper 
workshop is being offered with this goal in mind.  The half-day 
session, facilitated by members of Team Caliper, will provide 
LAK16 participants with an opportunity to extend the Caliper 
specification by modeling new learning activity profiles.  New 
profiles, new connections and new friendships are expected 
outcomes. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.1 [Computers in Education]: Computer Uses in Education. 

General Terms 
Measurement, Documentation, Design. 

Keywords 
Learning Analytics, Information Modeling, Controlled 
Vocabularies, Learning Activity Profiles, IMS Caliper. 

1. MOTIVATION 
Educational institutions are evolving away from the one-
application-fits-all learning management system to a loosely 
connected digital learning ecosystem comprising diverse services 
that increasingly leverage data analytics to drive pedagogical 
innovation. Yet an ecosystem rich in services but lacking a 
common approach to measuring learning activity will find data 
collection, aggregation and analysis time-consuming and costly. 
The IMS Caliper AnalyticsTM specification addresses the need for 

data and semantic interoperability by providing an extensible 
information model, controlled vocabularies and an API for 
instrumenting learning applications and systems that log learning 
events [1].    

The Caliper information model is composed of a set of extensible 
learning activity profiles.  Each profile specifies a controlled 
vocabulary of actions and the entities that together comprise the 
event and its context.  Caliper profiles are designed to encourage 
data exchange across multiple platforms by providing both 
structure and shared meaning to otherwise raw event streams. 

However, many learning activities have yet to be modeled by the 
Caliper working group.  Engaging the SoLAR community directly 
in this effort will help ensure that the needs of researchers and 
other consumers of learning analytics data will inform future 
versions of the specification.  The LAK16 Caliper workshop is 
being offered with this goal in mind.  The half-day session, 
facilitated by members of Team Caliper, will provide LAK16 
participants with an opportunity to extend the Caliper 
specification by modeling new learning activity profiles [2]. 

2. OBJECTIVES 
The Caliper 1.0 specification comprises a modest number of 
profiles that cover a limited set of learning activities.  Activities 
described by the specification include logging in and out of 
applications, navigation, viewing and annotating digital resources, 
interacting with rich media, taking online assessments and 
providing graded outcomes.  The Caliper working group is 
looking to LAK16 participants to help enrich the existing set of 
profiles as well add additional profiles in order to extend the 
information model and increase its utility.  Caliper workshop 
objectives are fourfold: i) increase awareness and understanding 
of the Caliper information model and Caliper specification; ii) 
provide practical training on modeling learning activities; iii) 
generate a set of draft metric profiles that can be included in 
future releases of the Caliper specification; and iv) encourage the 
SoLAR community to consider engaging more directly with the 
project.  New profiles, new connections and new friendships are 
expected outcomes. 

3. AUDIENCE 
In contrast to the LAK16 Apereo/JISC hackathon, which seeks 
participants possessing a technical mindset, the Caliper workshop 
is open to all practitioners and researchers with a professional 
interest in the advancement of teaching and learning and the 
practical application of learning analytics.  In short, one need not 
be a developer or data architect to contribute usefully to the 
evolution of the Caliper specification. 

4. FORMAT 
Members of Team Caliper will lead the half-day workshop.  The 
workshop will commence with a brief overview of the Caliper 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact 
the Owner/Author.  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).  
LAK '16, April 25-29, 2016, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  
ACM 978-1-4503-4190-5/16/04.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883858 



information model and its constituent profiles and controlled 
vocabularies.  Following the overview, participants will be invited 
to propose learning activities that they would like to model or they 
can choose from a list of suggested activities that require 
modeling.  A partial list of learning/instructor activities that have 
yet to be described include learner participation, content 
authoring, Q&A forums, chat, problem sets, peer assessments, 
rubrics, credentialing and mentoring/advising.  Participants may 
have a local need that requires creation of a custom profile; the 
facilitators will happily accommodate such interests.   Participants 
will then self-organize into teams of 2-3 in order to design one or 
more draft Caliper profiles and then report out on their work 
before the close of the workshop. Draft profiles will be stored in a 
public Github repository.  

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The Caliper AnalyticsTM specification was developed under the 
auspices of the IMS Global Learning Consortium, a non-profit 
organization that fosters collaboration among the world’s leading 
education providers and technology suppliers.  Both the 
University of Michigan and Intellify Learning are contributing 
members of IMS Global and active participants in the IMS 
Caliper working group. 

6. REFERENCES 
[1] IMS Global. 2015. IMS Caliper AnalyticsTM Implementation 

Guide.  http://www.imsglobal.org/caliper/caliperv1p0/ims-
caliper-analytics-implementation-guide.  

[2] A. Whyte. 2016.  Extending IMS Caliper AnalyticsTM with 
Learning Activity Profiles.  http://www.arwhyte.org/caliper-
workshop/.

 



