
Educational Monitoring Tool Based on Faceted Browsing
and Data Portraits

David García-Solórzano
Universitat Oberta de

Catalunya
Rambla del Poblenou, 156

Barcelona, Spain
dgarciaso@uoc.edu

Germán Cobo
Universitat Oberta de

Catalunya
Rambla del Poblenou, 156

Barcelona, Spain
gcobo@uoc.edu

Eugènia Santamaría
Universitat Oberta de

Catalunya
Rambla del Poblenou, 156

Barcelona, Spain
esantamaria@uoc.edu

Jose Antonio Morán
Universitat Oberta de

Catalunya
Rambla del Poblenou, 156

Barcelona, Spain
jmoranm@uoc.edu

Carlos Monzo
Universitat Oberta de

Catalunya
Rambla del Poblenou, 156

Barcelona, Spain
cmonzo@uoc.edu

Javier Melenchón
Universitat Oberta de

Catalunya
Rambla del Poblenou, 156

Barcelona, Spain
jmelenchonm@uoc.edu

ABSTRACT
Due to the idiosyncrasy of online education, students may
become disoriented, frustrated or confused if they do not
receive the support, feedback or guidance needed to be suc-
cessful. To avoid this, the role of teachers is essential. In this
regard, instructors should be facilitators who guide students
throughout the teaching-learning process and arrange mean-
ingful learner-centered experiences. However, unlike face-
to-face classes, teachers have difficulty in monitoring their
learners in an online environment, since a lot of learning
management systems provide faculty with student tracking
data in a poor tabular format that is difficult to understand.
In order to overcome this drawback, this paper presents a
novel graphical educational monitoring tool based on faceted
browsing that helps instructors to gain an insight into their
classrooms’ performance. Moreover, this tool depicts infor-
mation of each individual student by using a data portrait.
Thanks to this monitoring tool, teachers can, on the one
hand, track their students during the teaching-learning pro-
cess and, on the other, detect potential problems in time.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.1 [Administrative Data Processing]: Education; K.3
[Computer Uses in Education]: Distance Learning; H.5
[User Interfaces]: Graphical user interfaces

General Terms
Management, Design, Human Factors

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
LAK ’12, 29 April – 2 May 2012, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1111-3/12/04 ...$10.00.

Keywords
Learning analytics, information visualization, student mon-
itoring, instructor support, faceted browsing, data portraits

1. INTRODUCTION
In the last years, distance learning has become very pop-

ular, especially, its modality of online education. In this
regard, online students have different characteristics, needs
and preferences to the ones who attend face-to-face classes.
For instance, online learners are often over 30 years old,
which means having learners with different professional and
educational backgrounds in the same classroom. This het-
erogeneity entails helping students with different needs at
the same time. Likewise, because most learners are adult,
they have a lot of responsibilities, such as: working, taking
care of children, etc. Consequently, it is hardly surprising
that they prefer studying at their convenience, i.e. anytime,
anywhere and at their own pace.

As a result of the aforementioned particularities, online
education should avoid using a teacher-centered paradigm,
since it treats all learners as if they were the same and forces
them to do the same things in the same amount of time [32].
Instead, online education, as any kind of distance learning,
involves a student-centered approach in which the instructor
is a facilitator and students engage in peer learning [19, 25].
Thus, students are required to take primary responsibility
for their learning process [4]. To do this, learners need to
have some specific skills, e.g. self-regulation. However, some
studies [23, 26] provide evidence that a lot of students need
some help to learn these skills, since most of them are not
able to achieve these abilities on their own. Consequently,
the role of teachers shifts from a masterful figure to a facilita-
tor who guides learners throughout the course and arranges
meaningful learner-centered experiences [29]. This role is es-
sential in online education, since learners may become dis-
oriented, frustrated or confused if they do not receive the
support, feedback or guidance needed to be successful [8].

In order to carry out a good instruction in an online en-
vironment, instructors need appropriate means to set up a
monitoring process so that they can be aware of the stu-

170



dents’ learning process and provide learners with just-in-
time assistance. In addition, monitoring allows teachers to
forecast potential problems (e.g. dropouts) and avoid them
in time. In this regard, instructors can use tracking infor-
mation (e.g. logs) and monitoring tools which are available
in learning management systems (LMSs). However, a com-
parative study on tracking functionalities of various LMSs
[10] concluded that none of them offer much tracking abil-
ity. One of the reasons of this devastating conclusion may
be the fact that these platforms often provide tracking data
in a tabular format which is commonly poorly structured,
incomprehensible and difficult to understand [21].
To avoid the aforesaid drawbacks, this paper presents a

novel graphical educational monitoring tool based on faceted
browsing and data portraits. On the one hand, faceted
browsing, as an exploratory search technique, helps instruc-
tors to narrow the class roster down until finding those learn-
ers who meet teachers’ requirements. On the other hand,
data portraits depict summarized information about an in-
dividual student in a single image.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: a catego-

rization of educational monitoring tools can be found in the
next section. In section 3, an educational monitoring tool
based on faceted browsing and data portraits is proposed.
Finally, conclusions and future work are in section 4.

2. CLASSIFICATION OF EDUCATIONAL
MONITORING TOOLS

This paper classifies educational monitoring tools into two
categories: (1) according to the data processing techniques
that they use, and (2) the element which they monitor. They
both are described below.

2.1 Data Processing Techniques
The main goal of any monitoring tool, whether this has an

educational purpose or not, is to give users insights on the
data at which they are looking. To this end, two different
data processing techniques can mainly be used. On the one
hand, information visualization (IV) techniques and, on the
other, data mining (DM) algorithms. Next, they both are
explained in sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, respectively. At the
same time, some relevant educational examples related to
each method are described briefly. Finally, a brief discussion
about the main differences between IV and DM is presented
in the section 2.1.3.

2.1.1 Information Visualization
One of the most well-known definitions of information vi-

sualization (IV) was proposed by Card et al. [3]: “the use
of computer-supported, interactive, visual representations of
abstract data to amplify cognition”. Thus, IV encompasses
a set of techniques that transform data into effective graph-
ical representations by taking properties of human visual
perception into consideration. Thereby, these visual repre-
sentations reveal facts and trends which allow users to infer
some unknown information by combining the visual inputs
with their knowledge of data. To stress that the data pro-
cessing which is performed in IV is mainly based on simple
mathematical and statistical functions, such as sum, calcu-
lation of percentages, mean, median, mode, and so on.
In the educational context, some proposals based on IV

techniques have been suggested. Two of the most relevant

tools are CourseVis [21] and, its successor, GISMO [22]. The
former is a stand-alone visualization tool that obtains track-
ing data from WebCT, transforms them into a form con-
venient for processing and generates graphical representa-
tions that can be explored and manipulated by instructors.
Thereby, teachers can examine social (it uses a 3D visual-
ization of discussion boards), cognitive (it uses a matrix in
which each cell is the grade attained by a specific student
in a particular quiz), and behavioral (it shows information
about access and participation in a timeline) aspects of stu-
dents. CourseVis mainly uses 2D visualization techniques,
but it also uses color and shape as a third dimension.

As far as GISMO is concerned, this also uses LMS track-
ing data, but in this case from Moodle, to display graphical
representations (e.g. bar charts, matrices, etc.) about over-
all classroom accesses and detailed information of a specific
student. This was developed as a Moodle block, but its
interface is detached from Moodle’s one.

Similarly, Zhang et al. [35] designed Moodog, a visual
student tracking data plug-in for Moodle which also sends
automatic reminder e-mails to students. This displays in-
formation about the course, students, resources and access
time. Unlike GISMO, the information provided by Moodog
is integrated into Moodle’s interface, keeping the original
Moodle’s layout as much as possible.

There are many other works that have also proposed dif-
ferent representations based on IV techniques. For instance,
Hardy et al. [9] constructed, as a graph, the route taken
by one student through the course material during a sin-
gle work session; Hijo?n-Neira and Vela?zquez-Iturbide [11]
used an interactive graph (for students’ grades) and a data
mountain (for access) by using Prefuse API; Juan et al. [14],
in turn, proposed scatter plots and quadrants as well as an
evolution graph in order to represent students’ performance;
and Bakharia et al. [2] proposed SNAPP, a social network
analysis tool that displays, as a graph, the evolution of par-
ticipants’ relationships within an LMS’s discussion forums.

2.1.2 Data Mining
According to Romero and Ventura [28], data mining (DM)

techniques can be classified into four categories: (1) cluster-
ing, classification and outlier detection; (2) association rule
mining and sequential pattern mining; (3) text mining; and
(4) statistics and visualization. However, the latter is not
universally seen as a category of DM [1], since the data pro-
cessing that is carried out is minimum compared to the rest
of categories, which are based on artificial intelligence algo-
rithms. In fact, the fourth category proposed by Romero
and Ventura accords with the definition of information visu-
alization (IV) presented in the section 2.1.1. Hence, in this
paper, only the first three categories defined by Romero and
Ventura are considered as belonging to data mining.

DM techniques are able to infer underlying patterns from
a large database, generating some new type of valuable in-
formation such as student models or predictions. These new
data can be delivered in writing or visually.

For some time now, more and more educational monitor-
ing tools are based on DM. For example, Kosba et al. [17]
developed TADV, a system that builds student, group and
classroom models by using fuzzy logic. From these models,
TADV gives instructors advice, e.g. to advise a learner to
review a concept. Thereby, teachers have extra information
to make appropriate decisions during the course.

171



On the other hand, Hung and Zhang [12] used statistical
models and machine learning algorithms to analyze patterns
of online learning behaviors and, at the same time, to make
predictions on learning outcomes.
Zorrilla et al. [37], in turn, proposed a decision support

system that utilized different techniques. First, two clus-
tering algorithms, Expectation-Maximization (EM) and K-
Means, were used to characterize, on the one hand, students
and, on the other, sessions. The output of EM, a probabil-
ity distribution, allowed to determine the number of clusters
with which K-Means would be executed. Depending on the
input data, the clusters obtained from K-Means described
either student behavior models or session patterns. In ad-
dition to the information provided by the clusters, the pro-
posal of Zorrilla et al. also indicated the resources that were
commonly used together. To obtain these data, Apriori, an
algorithm for finding association rules, was employed.
More proposals of educational monitoring tools based on

DM techniques can be found in [1, 28].

2.1.3 Information Visualization vs. Data Mining
One of the main differences between information visual-

ization (IV) and data mining (DM) is how new information
is inferred. Due to the complexity of the algorithms used
in DM, these are able to suggest latent information with an
explanation based on text, rules, clusters, etc., e.g. “student
S is about to drop out because she has not acceded to the
classroom for two weeks”. By contrast, in the case of tools
based on IV techniques, new information is not inferred by
an algorithm, but by users through observing graphics and
taking advantage of their knowledge of the domain.
As a result of the manner of inferring new information,

two issues arise: (1) reliability, and (2) computational cost.
With regard to reliability, the users of tools based on DM
must rely on the accuracy of the information suggested by
the algorithm, whereas the users of tools based on IV infer
reliable information based on their own expertise.
As far as computational cost is concerned, IV techniques

calculates statistical data that require minimum processing,
while tools based on DM executes complex artificial intelli-
gence algorithms which are usually time-consuming.
Another important aspect is user-friendliness. Merceron

and Yacef [24] claim that it is essential to use techniques and
measurements which are fairly intuitive and easy to inter-
pret. In this regard, the explanation provided by the tools
based on DM often requires users to master the algorithm
so as to understand it. Unfortunately, a lot of users neither
have this knowledge nor can make time for acquiring it. On
the contrary, tools based on IV seem to meet these require-
ments better, since they use simple statistical data and focus
on displaying information in a visual and effective way.
Despite the differences between information visualization

and data mining, they can work together in an application.
For instance, a system can first infer some latent informa-
tion from a large database by using a DM algorithm and then
display it by using a visual representation based on IV tech-
niques. Thereby, users can benefit from the advantages of
each technique: on the one hand, the possibility of inferring
new data automatically and, on the other, the capability
of visual representations to convey information effectively.
This combination of DM algorithms with IV techniques is
called visual data mining [15]. There is every indication that
this new discipline will become a promising research area.

2.2 Monitored Element
Although the most popular name is student monitoring

tools, it would be more correct to call them educational
monitoring tools. The reason is that they can monitor other
items in addition to learners. In this regard, this section
describes the elements that are commonly monitored in an
educational context. Finally, to stress that both IV and DM
techniques can be used to track any of the following items.

2.2.1 Classroom
The most common item is the whole classroom, i.e. all

students are considered a unique entity. This entity is char-
acterized by the overall information that comes from com-
bining all students’ tracking data (e.g. class’s average grade
in each assignment). Thereby, instructors are provided with
an overview of their learners’ performance. Thanks to this,
teachers can make decisions that affect the whole class. Most
educational monitoring tools show data of the classroom.

2.2.2 Student Group
A particular case of the previous monitoring is the one

which focuses on groups. This is useful when group activi-
ties are proposed, e.g. tasks that belong to a project-based
learning. The supervision of groups allows to obtain in-
formation about how students interact each other, who are
the most and least participative members of a group, which
group has the best and the worst performance, etc. [2, 14,
27] are examples of group monitoring tools.

2.2.3 Individual Student
Teachers often need to take a closer look at a particu-

lar learner or make comparisons between students. Conse-
quently, they need tools that provide detailed information
about an individual learner (e.g. how many times a student
has accessed the LMS). These data may help instructors to
gain understanding of the reasons why a specific learner has
a particular behavior. Thereby, teachers can offer each stu-
dent a better support and a tailored learning experience. Re-
garding this, CourseVis [21] and Moodog [35] are two tools
that display information of a particular student.

2.2.4 Resources
The term resource encompasses a wide spectrum of el-

ements, from learning materials (e.g. documents, videos,
quizzes, etc.) to educational tools (e.g. forum, chat, LMS’s
pages, etc.). Regarding this, there are multiple types of data
related to resources that can be tracked, e.g. how many
times a document has been read, how many messages a fo-
rum has, the path that a learner followed while she was nav-
igating through an LMS, etc. Hence, monitoring resources
may provide teachers with valuable information about the
instructional design (e.g. to detect a bad design of content
pages) and students’ performance (e.g. to detect whether
learners are engaging in the course thanks to forums partic-
ipation). An example of this kind of monitoring is [37].

Likewise, a graphic can simultaneously provide informa-
tion about various items depending on how this is read. For
instance, Mazza and Dimitrova [21] use a matrix to show
students’ performance on quizzes. Thereby, if teachers paid
attention to a specific column, they would observe the per-
formance of a particular student in all course quizzes. By
contrast, if a row were observed, then teachers would analyze
the performance of the whole class in a specific quiz.

172



3. PROPOSAL
From the observations done in the previous section, this

paper presents a graphical interactive educational monitor-
ing tool which uses information visualization (IV) techniques.
This allows instructors to monitor the class and, at the same
time, look details of a particular student. The first part,
monitoring of the classroom, is based on faceted browsing,
a type of exploratory search. As far as the second part is
concerned, a novel technique called data portrait is used to
depict the information of a specific learner. A detailed ex-
planation of both parts of the tool is exposed below.
Nevertheless, before explaining the proposal of this paper,

a brief list of the most common characteristics of educational
monitoring tools based on IV is given. This will help to
better understand the work presented in this article.

3.1 Features of Educational Monitoring Tools
Based on Information Visualization

3.1.1 Stand-alone vs. Built-in
There are tools which have their own interface and collect

data from an LMS [21, 22], whereas there are others that,
due to the success of LMSs (e.g. Moodle), are integrated
into their framework as a plug-in [35].

3.1.2 Representation 2D vs. 3D
There are two kinds of representation according to the

number of axes: 2D and 3D. In this regard, 2D graphics are
firmly established. They consist of two dimensions (or axes)
in which each of them represents a variable (or attribute) of
information (e.g. students, grades, etc.).
To a lesser extent, 3D graphics has also been proposed,

e.g. the scatter plot for discussion boards suggested in [21].
In general, 2D representations are usually more intuitive

for instructors than 3D ones. For that reason, most of edu-
cational monitoring tools display 2D graphics.

3.1.3 Multivariate Data
Much more variables than the number of axes of the graphic

(i.e. 2D or 3D) can be displayed thanks to the use of differ-
ent techniques. Next, some of them are described briefly:

• Single-axis composition [18]: this is a method whereby
an axis represents a large set of variables (e.g. content
topics, number of accesses, etc.). This is used in [21].

• Visual components: elements such as color, shape and
size, are often used as a data dimension.

• Quadrants: these allow to organize data into four dif-
ferent groups. These are employed in [14].

• Mouse events: different mouse actions, such as click
and rollover, are also used to show information (e.g.
relationships between elements [11]).

• Multivariate representations: unlike most of the pro-
posals that depict data as points, bars, lines and so
on, there are tools that use a single representation
to display multivariate observations with an arbitrary
number of variables. This is the case of star plots
[13], which show each observation (e.g. a learner) as a
star-shaped figure with one ray for each variable (e.g.
grades, participation, etc.).

3.1.4 Manipulation
Zoom, rotation (in 3D) and filtering are typical actions

that educational monitoring tools allow instructors to do.
With regard to filtering, this refers to hide some visual

elements so as to emphasize others. Thereby, some values
in the graphic act as layers that can be shown and hidden.
Take the example of a bar chart that shows the number of
posts written by the students of a class. In this case, the
graphic has the variables “student” (X-axis), whose values
are {S1,S2,S3,S4,S5}, and “number of posts” (Y-axis) with
values {4,6,7,5,8}. If the graphic focuses on the students,
then this has 5 layers (i.e. S1-S5). Hence, a teacher can
indicate that the graphic only shows the bars that belong to
the students S2 and S5. However, she cannot set a general
constraint that asks to show those learners who have written
between 3 and 9 messages, since the layers 3 and 9 do not
exist. Similarly, she cannot filter the information based on
other variables that are not layers (e.g. number of accesses).

A lot of educational monitoring tools with filtering op-
tions are based on static layers, therefore this limits the ex-
ploratory search that an instructor can carry out.

3.2 Monitoring of the Classroom

3.2.1 What Is Faceted Browsing?
Faceted browsing is becoming a popular method to allow

users to interactively search and navigate through complex
information spaces [16]. This is widely used on a lot of e-
commerce websites such as eBay or Wal-Mart.

A faceted browser provides users with facet-value pairs
that are used for query refinement. Faceted browsing is
made up of three stages [34]: opening, middle game and end
game. In the opening, the interface shows the whole collec-
tion and all facets that can be used. The middle game, in
turn, allows users to iteratively narrow down the result set
by defining constraints on the values of one or several facets,
which refines the search query. Finally, the end game occurs
when the user finishes the search by selecting an individual
item from the result set and its information is detailed.

3.2.2 Why Is Faceted Browsing Suitable for Educa-
tional Monitoring in an Online Environment?

As said in section 1, teachers in online education should be
guides. To carry out this role, they need to observe students’
behavior by analyzing any feature associated with learners.
Thereby, teachers may detect any kind of problem in time.

Unlike the other proposals, which show graphics with pre-
defined attributes or queries, faceted browsing allows teach-
ers to perform an exploratory search strategy by using a wide
range of orthogonal variables (i.e. facets). Thereby, instruc-
tors gain an insight into the behavior of their students by
iteratively submitting tentative queries based on more than
one facet at the same time. This iterative process (i.e. the
middle game) finishes when teachers find relevant informa-
tion that they did not know or when the result set meets
a specific set of requirements that teachers wanted. In that
moment, instructors can either use the information found to
make decisions (e.g. to send an e-mail or start a new search),
or click on a student to see detailed information about her.

As seen, faceted browsing seems to be good at monitoring
a classroom, since it allows instructors to define any tailored
query and find relevant information that they did not know
while they explore/refine the result set.

173



Figure 1: The opening stage of the faceted browser proposal. Students remain anonymous.

3.2.3 Proposal of Faceted Browser
This paper presents a built-in faceted browser (see Figure

1) that collects data from an ad hoc learning management
system [7]. This uses information visualization techniques in
order to effectively display data, leaving knowledge inference
in teachers’ hands. Therefore, data mining techniques are
not used to obtain underlying information about students.
Regarding its interface, 2D graphics are used. Its design is

divided into two areas. The main one shows the class roster
as a set of cards in which each one includes student’s name
and photo. The use of a photo is better than identifying
students by looking at points, squares, bars, etc. Actually,
Zhao et al. [36] states that there is evidence for the existence
of a dedicated face processing system in human’s brain.
On the left, there is a menu that has different facets

whereby teachers can narrow down or sort out the class.
Table 1 gathers the facets that have been included along
with their possible values. The chosen facets encompass the
three aspects studied by Mazza [20]: sociality (i.e. forum
participation), cognition (i.e. assignments grade) and be-
havior (i.e. studying pace). To stress that facets related to
resources, such as the number of times that an item has been
accessed, were not included because the platform, in which
the faceted browser is placed, does not provide these data.
As seen in Table 1, facets can have nominal or numeric

values. Those facets that allow gradation are represented
with sliders. To indicate the number of students in each
facet value, numbers in parentheses and histograms are used.
Their values are updated depending on the data set that is
shown in the main area every time. This helps teachers to
set more meaningful queries during the middle game.
As said, teachers can sort out the result set by student’s

name, studying pace or the average grade of assignments, in
ascendant or descendant order.

Finally, different visual elements are used to represent
more variables in the main area. The background color of
each card indicates the learner’s studying pace. Thereby,
the more orange the background is, the more advanced the
student is. Besides the background color, the card can have
a red border that means that the average grade of assign-
ments is C- or less and, hence, that student would not pass
the course if the term finished at that moment. Moreover,
the border of the photo can be drawn with black dashes.
This means that the student is repeating the subject. Like-
wise and, because the result set can be ordered, the position
of the cards is another visual element that gives extra infor-
mation. Thereby, if a teacher sorted learners by the average
grade of assignments in ascendant order, then students with
lower grades would be on the top positions.

3.2.4 An Example of Using the Faceted Browser
From the opening stage shown in Figure 1, a teacher may

define any query, e.g. “to retrieve, ordered by studying pace
in a descendant way, those students who, regardless of their
participation in forums, are not repeating the course and, at
the same time, have achieved 24% of activities as well as they
have an average grade of assignments equal or greater than
C+”. If the previous query were executed, then the result
set would be that shown in Figure 2b. In this regard, Figure
2a shows the transition between the opening (see Figure 1)
and the middle game (see Figure 2b). As seen, instructors
can see how students change their positions or even they
dissapear. Thanks to the possibility of seeing the transition,
teachers can gain extra understanding of their learners.

Finally, it is worth emphasizing that the result of the Fig-
ure 2b may be either an intermediate step of the middle
game or the last one. This depends on whether the teacher
is satisfied with the result and selects one student, or prefers
to narrow down the result set by changing some facets.

174



Table 1: Set of facets with their values

Category Facet Values Type

Basic information
Gender male, female or all

Nominal
Status new (i.e. first time in the course), repeat or all

Performance
Studying pace [0%, 100%] Numerical

Assignments grade [NA (Not Assessed),NP (Not Presented),D,C-,C+,B,A] Nominal

Forums participation

Num. initial posts [0, max. num. messages posted by a student]

Numerical
Num. replies [0, max. num. replies written by a student]

Num. messages read [0, num. messages in the forum]
Average grade of messages [0, 5]
Num. highlighted messages [0, num. messages highlighted by the teacher]

(a) Transition (b) Middle game

Figure 2: Execution of a query in the proposed faceted browser.

3.3 Monitoring of an Individual Student
So far, only information about the whole classroom has

been represented. However, instructors need to know details
of a specific learner quite often. In this regard, the great
majority of monitoring tools usually show the same kind of
graphic for both the classroom and the learner. Instead, the
present paper suggests using a novel technique, called data
portraits, to display an individual student’s information.

3.3.1 What Is a Data Portrait?
According to Donath [5], “data portraits depict their sub-

jects’ accumulated data rather than their faces. They can
be visualizations of discussion contributions, browsing histo-
ries, social networks, travel patterns, etc. (...). Data por-
traits depict a person through their digital archive”. In short,
the idea behind data portraits is to compactly convey a large
amount of information from an individual in a single graphic.
An example of data portrait used for discussion forums

is PeopleGarden [33]. This is a metaphor in which each
user is a flower and, hence, the forum is a garden. Each
petal symbolizes a message written by the user. Thereby,
the number of petals indicates the user’s posting frequency.
Thus, the more petals a flower has, the more active the user
is. Likewise, the petal’s color represents if the message is
an initial post (in magenta) or a reply (in blue). Moreover,
pistil-like circles are used on top of the petals to show how
many responses each message has received. To display how
old a message is, petals, like in the real life, fade over time.
Another similar proposal is daisy maps [13]. A daisy map

is a star-shaped glyph that displays the scores received on
different parts of an assignment (e.g. reading, writing, etc.).

Thereby, each student is a daisy map and each ray has a
color depending on the score attained.

Lexigraphs [6] is, in turn, a group of data portraits in
which each user is represented as a face-like outline. Each
one is drawn by the words written in the user’s Twitter
account. Thus, silhouettes are updated with each new tweet.

Finally, Authorlines [31] is an horizontal timeline with ver-
tical monthly dividers that represents the user’s yearly post-
ing behavior in a set of newsgroups. Each month is divided
into weeks, and each week is shown as a vertical lineup of
circles. Each circle represents a conversation and its size
indicates the number of author’s messages in that thread.
Authorlines places threads that were initiated by the author
above the timeline, whereas the rest of threads to which she
contributed are placed underneath the timeline.

3.3.2 Proposal of Student Data Portrait
The proposed data portrait creates a snapshot of an indi-

vidual student from the data of her learning process. Each
portrait appears when the instructor moves the mouse over
a card of the proposed faceted browser. The items shown in
the data portrait are the facets of Table 1, except gender.

The data portrait (see Figure 3) is a bar that is divided
into five squares: number of initial posts (in dark blue), num-
ber of replies (light blue), number of read messages (pink),
the average grade of the messages (green) and the num-
ber of highlighted messages (orange). Therefore, these five
squares represent the student’s forums participation. Each
one of them change its opacity in order to indicate the level
of achievement. The lighter the color of the square is, the
lower student’s performance in that item is, and vice versa.

175



(a) Active (b) Threads initiator (c) Replies a lot (d) Lurker

(e) Pass and repeat (f) Fail and no repeat (g) Drop out and repeat

Figure 3: Different examples of student data portraits.

Likewise, the border of the bar can be red or black. Red
means that the student would not pass if the course finished
at that moment. Moreover, this can be drawn with dashes.
This indicates that the learner is repeating the course.
Finally, there are two red markers above and underneath

the bar. The former represents the studying pace (in per-
centage), i.e. how many activities the learner has already
finished. Thereby, the top of the bar works as a continu-
ous axis that goes from 0% to 100%. As far as the second
marker is concerned, this indicates the average grade of the
assignments. In this case, the bottom of the bar works as a
discrete axis whose values are: NA/NP, D, C-, C+, B and
A. Each value coincides with the ends of each square.

3.3.3 Examples of Using the Student Data Portrait
Figure 3 shows different students’ behaviors by using the

proposed data portrait. For example, the learner in Figure
3a participates actively in forums, since she writes (opaque
dark blue) and replies (opaque light blue) a lot and, at the
same time, she reads most of messages (opaque pink).
On the other hand, the student in Figure 3b initiates a lot

of conversations (opaque dark blue), but she does not reply
to other messages (transparent light blue). Therefore, she
only writes when she initiates the conversation. By contrast,
the learner in Figure 3c helps classmates by participating in
threads initiated by others (opaque light blue). However, she
does not initiate any conversation. Moreover, the teacher
has highlighted some of her messages (opaque orange). As
seen, the students in Figure 3b and Figure 3c participate in
discussion forums, but in an opposite way.
According to Taylor [30], the learner in Figure 3d would

be a lurker. A lurker can be defined as a user that writes
occasionally or not at all (transparent dark and light blues),
but she regularly participates as a reader (opaque pink).
Likewise, lurker students usually obtain similar grades to
more active learners. For instance, in Figure 3d, this student
has a B as the average grade of her assignments.
The last three data portraits show: Figure 3e) a student

who is repeating the course (dashed border) and, at that
moment, she would pass the course (she has a C+); Figure
3f) a lurker who does activities, but she would fail (red bor-
der and bottom marker in the beginning); and Figure 3g)
a student who has dropped out (all squares are transpar-
ent, her studying pace is low and she has not handed in any
assignment) and, moreover, is repeating (dashed border).
As seen, thanks to the proposed data portrait, it is possi-

ble to compact a student’s learning process in a single image.
Thereby, teachers can get an overall idea of a student at a
glance and compare learners with each other easily.

4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Online education involves a student-centered approach in

which the instructor is a facilitator. Consequently, teachers
should be guides who help their students to achieve learning
goals successfully. To carry out this role properly, instruc-
tors should be provided with the maximum amount of data
about both the whole classroom and a particular student.

With regard to this necessity, this paper introduces a novel
approach of educational monitoring tool whose contribution
is twofold. On the one hand, the use of facet browsing to
monitor a classroom is proposed. As seen, facet browsers
provide a user-friendly way to navigate through data collec-
tions. Regarding its use in online education, faceted brows-
ing may help instructors to gain understanding of the be-
havior of their classrooms, since it allows teachers to explore
and analyze the class by requesting iterative tailored queries
based on different combinations of facets (i.e. attributes).

On the other hand, this paper promotes to employ a novel
technique called data portrait that allows to compact the
user’s information in a single picture. With regard to its use
in online education, a data portrait can be a good way to
summarize the student’s data visually, allowing teachers to
gain understanding of a student’s behavior at first glance. In
this regard, the data portrait of this paper is a first proposal
of this kind of visualization in the educational context. As
seen, this is in its very early stages and it thus needs to be
studied in depth in future research.

This paper also proposes a classification of educational
monitoring tools from two points of view. The first one
focuses on the data processing technique that is used, i.e.
information visualization and data mining, whereas the sec-
ond one is based on the element that is monitored. Likewise,
this paper presents a study on the most relevant features
that educational monitoring tools based on IV usually have.

As future work, the proposed faceted browser must be
integrated into the most popular LMSs, e.g. Moodle. To this
end, a plug-in version must be developed. Thus, educational
community will be able to take advantage of this tool.

Finally, an experiment with teachers throughout a term
must be conducted so as to check the effectiveness and use-
fulness of both the faceted browser and the data portrait.
After the experiment, a survey could be sent in order to
detect strong and weak points of the proposal. Likewise, a
focus group or semi-structured interviews with 4-6 instruc-
tors may also be useful to know their opinion in depth. From
the results of the survey and focus group/interviews, valu-
able conclusions might be drawn. Thereby, new features and
improvements might be defined and added to the tool.

176



5. REFERENCES
[1] R. S. Baker and K. Yacef. The State of Educational

Data Mining in 2009: A Review and Future Visions.
JEDM - Journal of Educational Data Mining (ISSN
2157-2100), 1(1):3–17, Oct. 2009.

[2] A. Bakharia and S. Dawson. Snapp: a bird’s-eye view
of temporal participant interaction. In Proceedings of
the 1st International Conference on Learning
Analytics and Knowledge, LAK ’11, pages 168–173,
New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.

[3] S. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings
in information visualization: using vision to think.
The Morgan Kaufmann series in interactive
technologies. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.

[4] N. Dabbagh and A. Kitsantas. Supporting
self-regulation in student-centered web-based learning
environments. International Journal on E-Learning,
3(1):40–47, 2004.

[5] J. Donath, A. Dragulescu, A. Zinman, F. Vie?gas, and
R. Xiong. Data portraits. In SIGGRAPH ’10: ACM
SIGGRAPH 2010 Art Gallery, pages 375–383, New
York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.

[6] A. C. Dragulescu. Data Portraits: Aesthetics and
Algorithms. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2009.

[7] D. Garc??a-Solo?rzano, G. Cobo, E. Santamaria, J. A.
Mora?n, and J. Melencho?n. Representation of a course
structure focused on activities using information
visualization techniques. In ICALT, pages 443–445,
2011.

[8] N. Hara and R. Kling. Students’ distress with a
web-based distance education course. Information,
Communication and Society, 3(4):557–579, 2000.

[9] J. Hardy, S. Bates, J. Hill, and M. Antonioletti.
Tracking and Visualisation of Student Use of Online
Learning Materials in a Large Undergraduate Course,
volume 4823 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 464–474. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2008.

[10] R. Hijo?n and A?ngel Vela?zquez. E-learning platforms
analysis and development of students tracking
functionality. In E. Pearson and P. Bohman, editors,
Proceedings of World Conference on Educational
Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications
2006, pages 2823–2828, Chesapeake, VA, June 2006.
AACE.

[11] R. Hijo?n-Neira and J. A. Vela?zquez-Iturbide. How to
improve assessment of learning and performance
through interactive visualization. In ICALT ’08:
Proceedings of the 2008 Eighth IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, pages
472–476, Washington, DC, USA, 2008. IEEE
Computer Society.

[12] J. L. Hung and K. Zhang. Revealing Online Learning
Behaviors and Activity Patterns and Making
Predictions with Data Mining Techniques in Online
Teaching. Journal of Online Learning and Teaching,
4(4):428–437, 2008.

[13] I. Icke and E. Sklar. A visualization tool for student
assessments data. In From Theory to Practice: Design,
Vision and Visualization Workshop. IEEE VisWeek
(2008), 2008.

[14] A. A. Juan, T. Daradoumis, J. Faulin, and F. Xhafa.

Developing an information system for monitoring
student’s activity in online collaborative learning. In
CISIS ’08: Proceedings of the 2008 International
Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software
Intensive Systems, pages 270–275, Washington, DC,
USA, 2008. IEEE Computer Society.

[15] D. A. Keim, W. Mu?ller, and H. Schumann. Visual
data mining. In D. Fellner and R. Scopigno, editors,
STAR Proceedings of Eurographics 2002, pages 49–68.
Eurographics Association, 2002.

[16] J. Koren, Y. Zhang, and X. Liu. Personalized
interactive faceted search. In Proceeding of the 17th
international conference on World Wide Web, WWW
’08, pages 477–486, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.

[17] E. Kosba, V. Dimitrova, and R. D. Boyle. Using
Student and Group Models to Support Teachers in
Web-Based Distance Education. In L. Ardissono,
P. Brna, and A. Mitrovic, editors, UM2005 User
Modeling: Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference, pages 124–133, Edinburgh, Scotland,
2005. Springer Verlag.

[18] J. Mackinlay. Automating the design of graphical
presentations of relational information. ACM Trans.
Graph., 5(2):110–141, 1986.

[19] D. Maor. The teacher’s role in developing interaction
and reflection in an online learning community.
Educational Media International, 40(1/2):127–138,
2003.

[20] R. Mazza and V. Dimitrova. Informing the design of a
course data visualisator: an empirical study. In 5th
International Conference on New Educational
Environments (ICNEE 2003), May 2003.

[21] R. Mazza and V. Dimitrova. Visualising student
tracking data to support instructors in web-based
distance education. In 13th International World Wide
Web Conference - Educational Track, pages 154–161.
ACM Press, 2004.

[22] R. Mazza and C. Milani. GISMO: a graphical
interactive student monitoring tool for course
management systems. In T.E.L.’04 Technology
Enhanced Learning ’04 International Conference.
Milan, pages 18–19, 2004.

[23] C. McInnis, R. James, and C. McNaught. First year
on campus. a commissioned project of the committee
for the advancement of university teaching. Technical
report, Canberra: Australian Government Publishing
Service, 1995.

[24] A. Merceron and K. Yacef. Interestingness measures
for associations rules in educational data. In EDM’08,
pages 57–66, 2008.

[25] T. J. F. Mitchell, S. Y. Chen, and R. D. Macredie.
The relationship between web enjoyment and student
perceptions and learning using a weba?A?R?based
tutorial. Learning, Media and Technology, 30(1):27–40,
2005.

[26] OECD. Learning for tomorrows world | first results
from pisa 2003. Technical report, Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
2004.

[27] R. Pirrone, V. Cannella, and G. Russo. A map-based
visualization tool to support tutors in e-learning 2.0.
In HSI’09: Proceedings of the 2nd conference on

177



Human System Interactions, pages 482–487,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2009. IEEE Press.

[28] C. Romero and S. Ventura. Educational data mining:
A survey from 1995 to 2005. Expert Syst. Appl.,
33(1):135–146, 2007.

[29] P. C. Salomon. Effective and responsible teaching: The
new synthesis, chapter The changing role of the
teacher: From information transmitter to orchestrator
of learning, pages 35–49. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco,
CA, 1992.

[30] J. Taylor. Teaching and learning online: the workers,
the lurkers and the shirkers. In 2nd Conference on
Research in Distance and Adult Learning in Asia,
CRIDALA 2002, 5–7 June 2002.

[31] F. B. Vie?gas. Newsgroup crowds and authorlines:
Visualizing the activity of individuals in
conversational cyberspaces. In In: Proceedings of the
37th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, IEEE, 2004.

[32] W. R. Watson and S. L. Watson. An Argument for
Clarity: What are Learning Management Systems,
What are They Not, and What Should They Become?
TechTrends, 51(2):28–34, Mar. 2007.

[33] R. Xiong and J. Donath. Peoplegarden: creating data
portraits for users. In UIST ’99: Proceedings of the
12th annual ACM symposium on User interface
software and technology, pages 37–44, New York, NY,
USA, 1999. ACM.

[34] K.-P. Yee, K. Swearingen, K. Li, and M. Hearst.
Faceted metadata for image search and browsing. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, CHI ’03, pages 401–408,
New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM.

[35] H. Zhang, K. Almeroth, A. Knight, M. Bulger, and
R. Mayer. Moodog: Tracking students’ online learning
activities. In Proceedings of World Conference on
Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and
Telecommunications 2007, pages 4415–4422, 2007.

[36] W. Zhao, R. Chellappa, P. J. Phillips, and
A. Rosenfeld. Face recognition: A literature survey.
ACM Comput. Surv., 35:399–458, December 2003.

[37] M. Zorrilla, D. Garc??a, and E. A?lvarez. A decision
support system to improve e-learning environments. In
Proceedings of the 2010 EDBT/ICDT Workshops,
EDBT ’10, pages 11:1–11:8, New York, NY, USA,
2010. ACM.

178





