An evaluation of policy frameworks for addressing ethical  considerations in learning analytics   Paul Prinsloo  University of South Africa   TVW4-69, P O Box 392, Unisa  0003, South Africa  +27 12 429 3683   prinsp@unisa.ac.za   Sharon Slade  Open University    Foxcombe Hall, Boars Hill  Oxford, UK   +44 1865 327000  sharon.slade@open.ac.uk      ABSTRACT  Higher education institutions have collected and analysed student  data for years, with their focus largely on reporting and  management needs. A range of institutional policies exist which  broadly set out the purposes for which data will be used and how  data will be protected. The growing advent of learning analytics  has seen the uses to which student data is put expanding rapidly.  Generally though the policies setting out institutional use of  student data have not kept pace with this change.   Institutional policy frameworks should provide not only an  enabling environment for the optimal and ethical harvesting and  use of data, but also clarify: who benefits and under what  conditions, establish conditions for consent and the de- identification of data, and address issues of vulnerability and  harm. A directed content analysis of the policy frameworks of two  large distance education institutions shows that current policy  frameworks do not facilitate the provision of an enabling  environment for learning analytics to fulfil its promise.   Categories and Subject Descriptors  K.3.1 [Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in Education - Distance learning, K.7.4 [The Computing Profession]:  Professional Ethics  Codes of ethics     General Terms  Management, Documentation, Security, Legal Aspects.   Keywords  learning analytics, ethics, distance learning, policy   1. INTRODUCTION  The majority of institutions have long employed academic  analytics for reporting, operational and financial decision-making,  and quality assurance purposes [1,2]. However, while learning  analytics is heralded as one of the key trends expected to  significantly impact on the shape of higher education within the  next few years [3,4,1], many institutional policy frameworks fail  to fully reflect the use and ethical implications of learning  analytics. The increasing digitisation of learning has resulted in  the availability of real-time data on an unprecedented scale,   creating new opportunities for harvesting digital trails of students  (non)engagement [5,1,6]. Knowing more about students learning  processes and trajectories allows the potential for higher education  institutions to offer personalised and customised curricula,  assessment and support to improve learning and retention [1,7].   Realising the promise of learning analytics will require  institutions to align their policies with national and international  legislative frameworks; to consider the ethical issues inherent in  the harvesting, use and dissemination of data and to ensure an  enabling environment for adequate resourcing and integration of  institutional support.   This paper will analyse the existing policy frameworks of two  large distance education institutions according to a set of  considerations developed by Slade and Prinsloo [8]. The Open  University in the UK (OU) operates largely within a developed  world and the University of South Africa (Unisa) within a  developing world context, each with considerably different  student profiles, business architectures and programme  qualification mixes. However, both are specialist open distance  learning (ODL) institutions with huge student numbers.  Furthermore, both grapple with balancing the tensions inherent in  the massification of higher education and openness, and their  commitment to quality provision, accreditation and planning  interventions to address concerns about throughput rates.    2. LEARNING ANALYTICS AS MORAL  PRACTICE - A SOCIO-CRITICAL  APPROACH  Defining and addressing ethical issues in learning analytics  depend on a number of epistemological and ideological  assumptions. Our own epistemological and ideological framework  falls within the broad scope of a socio-critical approach which  entails being critically aware of the way our cultural, political,  social, physical and economic contexts and power-relationships  shape our responses to the ethical dilemmas and issues in learning  analytics Choosing a specific socio-critical approach allows, inter  alia, engagement with both the potential and challenges of  learning analytics and recognises the unequal power-relations  between students and the institution.    Analysing a diverse range of literature, Slade and Prinsloo [8]  propose a number of considerations from which institutions can  develop context-specific and appropriate guidelines and policy  frameworks. These considerations are:     Who benefits and under what conditions    Conditions for consent, de-identification and opting out    Vulnerability and harm    Collection, analyses, access to and storage of data    Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that  copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights  for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be  honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to  republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior  specific permission and/or a fee.  LAK '13, April 08 - 12 2013, Leuven, Belgium  Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04$15.00.   240    3. METHODOLOGY  This paper entailed a two-stage qualitative research design. The  first stage applies a directed content analysis approach [9].   Institutional policies from both the OU and Unisa were identified  and cross-analysed to defamiliarise and ensure validity and  reliability. Trustworthiness was ensured by member-checking.   Neither institution has policies covering the analysis and use of  data with the explicit purpose of understanding, predicting and  influencing student learning. Both have specific policies relating  to the ethical use of student data for research. All other policies or  frameworks with reference to monitoring, surveillance, privacy  and security of data, etc., in the two institutions were identified  and reviewed for cues or guidelines specifically pertaining to the  use, analysis, dissemination and storage of educational data.  The second stage of the research design involved the evaluation of  the respective policies of the OU and Unisa against the set of  considerations [8] discussed above.    4. AN OVERVIEW OF CURRENT POLICY  FRAMEWORKS AT UNISA AND THE OU  There is currently no single policy at either institution which  covers, per se, the notion of learning analytics. In order to  establish potential gaps or guidelines pertaining to proposed  considerations [8], all policies of both institutions relating to data,  teaching and learning and research were scrutinized.    4.1 Who Benefits and Under What  Conditions  While authors such as Kruse and Pongsajapan [10] propose a  student-centric approach to learning analytics, Slade and  Prinsloo [8] state that it is crucial that all key stakeholders in  learning analytics should benefit from learning analytics. Such an  approach not only involves students, but everyone involved in  delivering and supporting learning.    However, we acknowledge that students are a major stakeholder  and should be seen as active agents in defining the purpose and  scope of collected data, as well as conditions for its use (e.g. de- identification). While there is some information accepted to fall  within the normal scope of the registration agreement between the  student and the institution, other categories of information will  require informed consent and an active commitment from students  to ensure the correctness and currency of data.    4.1.1 Unisa  While the different policies and guidelines pertaining to  conducting research using student data address issues of privacy,  informed consent, vulnerability, harm and benefit, there is no  indication in any Unisa policy or guideline document  communicating the harvesting and the conditions of harvesting of  data from students to the student community. References are  provided for Unisa documents in the public domain.   The Guidelines for Conducting Research Involving Unisa  Staff, Students or Data [11] explicitly excludes institutional  research or authorised routine data gathering activity, necessary  for the efficient administration and operation of Unisa (p.1).  When students register, they declare that the information they  provide is correct and current.   The benefits of harvesting and analysing educational data are not  explicitly highlighted in any Unisa policy or guideline document.  Students are also not provided with information on how their data  is used, by whom and under which conditions.    4.1.2 Open University  The majority of OU policy documents may be accessed through  the OU website [12]. The OU Student Community Charter  includes a number of overarching principles which aim to  establish a shared responsibility between University and student.  The Charter sets out the Universitys intention to anticipate and  respond positively to different needs and circumstances by  providing support that is appropriate for each individual learner  and their subject area of study.  The Retention of Student Data and Records policy makes clear  that some data will be depersonalised and retained for uses  relating to management, development and research.   The policy states that personal data owned by the university may  be shared with third parties; and conversely personal data owned  by other organisations may be shared with the OU. Where the  third party is acting as a university agent, the university remains  the data controller. The third party must adhere to the universitys  student data retention and security policies. Where the third party  takes ownership of OU student data (e.g. government agencies,  sponsors, etc.), the third party becomes the data controller. The  data is then subject to that third partys data retention policies.    The alumni office has an objective to both keep alumni up to date  with University activities and to pursue donation prospects. The  policy setting out the Retention of Alumni Data and Records  requires alumni contact details and contact history (e.g. donations  made) to be held indefinitely.   4.2 Conditions for Consent, De-identification  of Data and Opting Out  Considering conditions for consent, de-identification of data and  the option to opt-out of the collection of certain types of data  refers to the notion of informed consent and transparency, (e.g.  information regarding the uses to which their data might be put,  algorithms used to analyse data, etc.)    4.2.1 Unisa  While there are guidelines which include explicit conditions for  research on Unisa students, there is no guidance in any policy  where students are informed either that data will be harvested and  used, or which data will be harvested. The Interception and  Surveillance Policy states that Unisa may monitor or track,  although the policy applies specifically to the monitoring and  surveillance of employees. The Data Privacy Policy defines  students as consumers, that is, any natural person who enters ...  into an electronic transaction with a supplier as the end user of the  goods or services offered by that supplier; e.g. students [p.1]. The  purpose of the Data Privacy Policy is to protect the privacy of  privacy subjects; provide guidelines for the collection, use,  disclosure and maintenance of personal information by Unisa;  limit Unisas possible liability for privacy infringement; and  educate users on privacy and related rights (p. 2).    This policy also stresses that Users may only collect personal  information on privacy subjects if such information is necessary  for business purposes of Unisa, or when the privacy subject has  given permission that his/her personal information be collected by  or on behalf of the Unisa (p. 2). This implies that the collection,  analysis and use of student data is within the legal parameters of  the business purposes and is therefore legitimate. The collection  of information to inform the business of Unisa is confirmed by the  Guidelines for conducting research involving Unisa staff,  students or data [11] which states that while the purpose of this  document is to provide guidelines for acquiring permission to do   241    research that involves Unisa staff, students and/or data (p.1),  these guidelines do not apply to [the Department of Institutional  Statistics and Analysis] DISA research approved by the Vice  Principal: Research and Innovation, or to duly authorised routine  data gathering activity, which is necessary for the efficient  administration and operation of Unisa (p. 2).   None of the existing policies therefore mandates the university to  explicitly inform students that their behaviour may be monitored  or surveilled, or provides students with the opportunity to opt out  of these actions. Students may opt out as objects of research, and  the Policy on Research Ethics [13] makes informed consent and  anonymity non-negotiable (unless the latter is waived by the  participant him or herself). The Students Charter on Rights  and Responsibilities [14] makes no mention of data privacy,  access to own personal data, or to ensuring the correctness and  currency of personal data (whether from the perspective of the  institution or as a specific responsibility of students).    4.2.2 Open University  Within the Data Protection policy, students are informed that  some information, including the information you give us about  your ethnic background or a disability, may be used by the  University to identify students who require additional support or  specific services. We consider disclosure of this information as  explicit consent to use this information for this purpose (p. 1).    The OU Terms and conditions governing the use of software,  tools and content document sets out that material produced and  uploaded to the OU LMS may be used by The Open University  on an irrevocable and perpetual basis and may be incorporated  into module material and other content (p.3).   4.3 Vulnerability and Harm  Vulnerability and harm are defined as implicit or explicit  discrimination (whereby a student receives, or does not receive,  support based on what might be considered to be a random  personal characteristic), the consequences of labelling (on student  identity and behaviours) and the validity of regarding student  groups based on assumptions made about shared characteristics.    4.3.1 Unisa  If we consider that issues of privacy are directly linked to notions  of vulnerability and harm, there are several policies and guidelines  dealing with the protection of data and the prevention of harm.   The Unisa Information Security Policy prescribes a three-tier  classification system for information: namely confidential,  internal and public use. The purpose of the policy is to protect  Unisa's corporate data and information and any client, employee  or student information within its custody or safekeeping by  safeguarding its confidentiality, integrity and availability (p. 4).   Personal information is very broadly defined in the Data Privacy  Policy as encompassing a variety of data including (but not  limited to) information relating to the race, gender, sex,  pregnancy, marital status, national, ethnic or social origin, colour,  sexual orientation, age, physical or mental health, disability,  religion, culture, language and birth of the individual; information  relating to the education or the medical, criminal or employment  history of the individual or information relating to financial  transactions involving the individual; and correspondence sent by  the individual that is implicitly or explicitly of a private or  confidential nature or further correspondence that would reveal  the contents of the original correspondence.  Much of the data  above might be used within a learning analytics profiling model.  This then raises the interesting ethical issue regarding the use of   such data to personalise or customise the learning experience  without the explicit consent or refusal of consent by students.    Interestingly, the correctness of data provided to students by the  institution and vice versa can play a huge role in the scope and  permanence of vulnerability and harm. The Unisa Students  Charter on Rights and Responsibilities [14] is silent on matters  of data privacy, and on the students responsibility to ensure that  data provided to the institution are correct. The Students  Disciplinary Code [15] includes a statement under the description  of misconduct concerning the provision of materially false  information about the University (p. 4), but excludes provision of  materially false or incorrect personal data to the institution.    4.3.2 Open University  The OUs Information, Advice and Guidance Policy (IAG)  highlights OU objectives to empower students to achieve their  study goals and to develop independence in their decision-making  by providing timely and targeted IAG to students at key points  along the student journey that recognises and is responsive to  diverse and distinct need by ensuring online information and  advice is personalised, accessible, accurate, up to date and applies  innovative technology. It aims to provide a service which  respects the needs of the individual student and is in their best  interests. The policy does not discuss whether the support is in  the best interests of the individual student or the wider cohort to  which a student belongs, nor who makes decisions regarding best  interests. The lack of clarity on this point suggests the potential  for a dual role for the student which appears currently absent in  practice. Nor is it clear whether there are further guidelines which  determine the point at what tailored IAG becomes untenable in  terms of available (and affordable) resource.   The IAG policy explicitly recognises the diversity of student  backgrounds and educational experience, and flags that the  service delivered will be targeted to the specific needs of  enquirers and students at different stages of their student journey.  In this way, there is a tentative attempt at least to be transparent  about differential levels of service, about assumptions made about  student groupings which may relate to their shared characteristics,  and to recognise that these profiles may change over time.    Students are informed, when they first register that they must  notify the University within a reasonable time if they change their  personal details. When informing the University of a disability  which might affect their studies, students must provide further  evidence as required. Similarly, if any module requires the student  to meet specific conditions, there is a responsibility to inform the  University should those conditions no longer be met.  The OUs  Fraud Response Policy makes it clear that any student  intentionally and dishonestly making a false representation or  dishonestly failing to disclose information is considered to have  committed fraud for gain (where gain is assumed to extend  beyond the purely financial). The Code of Practice for Student  Discipline also includes as unacceptable conduct knowingly  making a false statement or fraudulently providing information (at  registration or when asking for a particular service).   4.4 Collection, Analyses, Access to and  Storage of Data  This aspect relates to information about sites (both inside and  outside of the LMS) used to gather information and to give  informed consent regarding the scope and rights of the institution  to harvest, analyse and use data from such sources. Students  should be told which information is integral to official   242    institutional business, which information may be harvested with  or without consent, and how they and others can help to ensure  the correctness, currency and appropriateness of data. Students  should be informed about uses of their data at registration.    4.4.1 Unisa  This consideration is covered extensively by the policy framework  at Unisa. The collection, analyses, access to and storage of student  data is not explicitly mentioned but implied within the broader  guidelines on data privacy. For example, the Data Privacy Policy  focuses explicitly on the institutions responsibility to safeguard  staff and operational data rather than a duty for students to respect  the data of fellow students or staff. The Information Security  Policy proposes a three-tier classification system for information:  namely confidential, internal and public use. The purpose of the  policy is to protect Unisa's corporate data and information and  any client, employee or student information within its custody or  safekeeping by safeguarding its confidentiality, integrity and  availability (p.4). The same principles are addressed in the  Information Sensitivity Classification Policy [16] which allows  that a single lapse in information security can have significant  long-term consequences and that Unisa unduly risks loss of  student relationships, loss of public confidence, internal  operational disruption, excessive costs and competitive  disadvantage (p.1). This policy states also that its intention is to  consistently protect confidential information regardless of its  form, the technology used to process it, who handles it, its  location, and the stage in its information lifecycle.  Under Access  control the principle of need to know is established, meaning  that information must not be disclosed to any person who does  not have a legitimate business need for the information (p.2).   The Records Management Policy [17] defines record as  recorded information, regardless of format or medium, which has  been created, received, used, accessed and maintained by Unisa  (and/or predecessors) as evidence and information in pursuance of  its legal obligations or in the transaction of business. Included are  e-mail, electronic records and records other than correspondence  (p.1). Access to records is governed by the sensitivity  classifications allocated to record series and detailed in the  Information Sensitivity Classification Policy. [16] Access to  records by employees or third parties is dealt with in accordance.   4.4.2 Open University  The OU has a clear Data Protection Policy establishing that  student records are created and maintained over significant  periods of time. The student record includes data collected at  registration and throughout the student journey. The data  controller is clearly given as The Open University, although it is  acknowledged that external service providers may process  personal information under strict contractual confidentiality  obligations. Students are informed that personal information is  used to:    process applications;    provide services (including providing certain online facilities   and/or services and sending information about current and  future study opportunities with the University);     conduct research to help plan and improve university services;    produce statistical information for publication;    provide information about students to others, in line with legal   and government requirements. The OU will transfer personal  information outside of the European Economic Area only  when necessary safeguards have been secured by contract.     allow others to provide services to students and alumni  This policy states that data may be transferred within the  University on a need-to-know basis to facilitate the provision of  academic and other services to students. There is no clear  guidance given regarding these academic or other services, nor  any explanation of what may define a need to know basis.   Within the Terms and conditions governing the use of  software, tools and content document, students are advised to  check the terms and conditions and privacy policy of any other  (external) website you visit. Within the University LMS, students  are informed via the Data Protection policy that Cookies are used  so that we can easily recognise you when you return to our  websites and, as a result, will enable us to provide you with a  better service. We may also track user traffic patterns in order to  determine the effectiveness of our website. Information obtained  from these cookies will not be used for marketing purposes or  released to third parties.(p.4). Students may opt not to receive  cookies while browsing the Universitys website, but would not  then be able to access password-protected sites.   The Open University Data Protection Policy states that  Information is protected from unauthorised access and we are  confident no one will be able to access your personal information  unlawfully. Any personal information transmitted from a  students browser to the OU web service, or from the service to  the students browser, is encrypted (as long as the students web  browser supports the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)). Students are  explicitly warned that internet email is not always secure and that  they take responsibility for information. Students are also made  aware that they may access personalised stored data, as well as an  overview of those stakeholders granted access to specific datasets.    The Freedom of Information Code of Practice limits public  access to information to non-personal recorded information.  However, the students rights to privacy under the Data Protection  Act 1998 outweigh the rights of other individuals to access their  information under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 except  under certain public interest exemptions.   The Retention of Student Data and Records Policy sets out the  conditions under which student data is maintained and covers all  student data (relating to an identifiable individual), information,  records and content relating to university business created by  university staff or students. The UKs Data Protection Act 1998  requires that student records are retained only as long as is  necessary, and should be accurate and up-to-date. As a student can  continue to study modules for many years, the deletion of certain  information after a set time with a requirement for the student to  re-submit up-to-date information ensures compliance with this  principle. The policy states both that There is an expectation by  students, employers and Government agencies  that Universities  should retain a permanent core record of student names, the  modules and qualifications studied and their outcomes (p.3), and  that there are records and data which need to be retained whilst a  student might continue to study with the OU.    On completion of their qualification, students become OU alumni.  The policy on the Retention of Alumni Data & Records  requires that alumni contact details continue to be held in student  record systems to ensure a single instance of accurate information.   Students are also advised under the guidance document Using  Social Networking Tools that they should take care to avoid  activity that infringes another person's privacy (e.g. by posting  their contact details without permission).   243    5. SUMMARY OVERVIEW AND  DISCUSSION  Having reviewed the policies of both Unisa and the OU against  the proposed considerations [8], it seems clear that the  institutions current policy frameworks largely focus on academic  analytics and research with an emphasis on data governance, data  security and privacy issues. Since learning analytics is more  concerned with learning data at course and departmental level [1],  both institutions policy frameworks appear to lack explicit  guidance for the questions, issues and ethical challenges to  institutionalise learning analytics.    While both institutions have classification systems for  categorising information, neither makes a distinction between the  different layers of information harvested from students in terms of  consent and opportunities to opt-out. It is accepted that there are  certain types of information and analyses (e.g. cohort analyses)  that fall within the legitimate scope of business of higher  education. There is though an urgent need to approach personal  data differently when it is used to categorise learners as at-risk, in  need of special support or on different learning trajectories.  Currently both institutions employ relatively crude and  incomplete data sets to customise learning and support. Both  institutions have ample policies and guidelines to protect data and  to ensure that data is governed according to national and  international legislation.    It is clear from the existing policy frameworks of both that the  definition and scope, harvesting and analyses of data is an  imbalanced and non-transparent affair.    6. CONCLUSION  Educational data mining is established practice in higher  education and the increasing digitisation of education,  technological advances, the changing nature and availability of  data have huge potential for learning analytics to contribute to our  understanding of the different variables impacting on the  effectiveness of learning, student success and retention.  Most higher education institutions have existing policy  frameworks in response to (inter)national legislative contexts to  regulate and govern intellectual property, safeguard data privacy,  and regulate access to data. These policy frameworks may not  always be sufficient to address the specific ethical challenges in  the harvest and analysis of big data in learning analytics.    Approaching learning analytics from a socio-critical perspective  [8] suggests gaps in the policy frameworks of two large distance  education institutions: the OU and Unisa. Both these institutions  policy frameworks offer extensive protection and regulation with  regard to data privacy and protection.    This brief review of both institutions policy frameworks  highlights the irregularity of learning analytics where the  institution is the only role-player with decision-making power,  determining the scope, definition and use of educational data  without the input of other stakeholders.   This research indicates that some higher education institutions  policy frameworks may no longer be sufficient to address the  ethical issues in realising the potential of learning analytics.     7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  The authors would like to acknowledge the OU and Unisa for  their support, and Aimee Rhead for her preparation work.   8. REFERENCES  [1] Long, P. & Siemens, G. 2011. Penetrating the fog: Analytics   in learning and education. EDUCAUSE Review  September/October, 31-40.   [2] Van Barneveld, A., Arnold, K.E., & Campbell, J.P. 2012.  Analytics in higher education: establishing a common  language. ELI paper 1: 2012. EDUCAUSE. Retrieved from  http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ELI3026.pdf   [3] Booth, M. 2012. Learning analytics: the new black.  EDUCAUSE Review, July/August, 52-53.   [4] Johnson, L., Adams, S., & Cummins, M. 2012. The NMC  Horizon Report: 2012 Higher education Edition. Austin,  Texas: The New Media Consortium.   [5] Oblinger, D.G. 2012. Lets talk analytics. EDUCAUSE  Review, July/August, 10-13.   [6] Siemens, G. 2011. Learning analytics: envisioning a research  discipline and a domain of practice. Paper presented at  LAK12, Vancouver. Retrieved from  http://learninganalytics.net/LAK_12_keynote_Siemens.pdf   [7] Subotzky, S., & Prinsloo, P. 2011. Turning the tide: a socio- critical model and framework for improving student success  in open distance learning at the University of South Africa.  Distance Education, 32(2), 177-193.   [8] Slade, S., & Prinsloo, P. 2013. Learning Analytics: Ethical  Issues and Dilemmas. Manuscript accepted for publication,  American Behavioral Scientist.   [9] Hsiu-Fang Hsieh, H-F., & Shannon, S.E. 2005. Three  approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative Health  Research, 15, 1277-1288. DOI: 10.1177/1049732305276687   [10] Kruse, A., & Pongsajapan, R. 2012. Student-centered  learning analytics. Retrieved from  https://cndls.georgetown.edu/m/documents/thoughtpaper- krusepongsajapan.pdf   [11] Unisa. 2012. Guidelines for conducting research involving  Unisa staff, students or data.  http://heda.unisa.ac.za/filearchive/Guidelines_Research%20I nvolving_UNISAstaff.pdf   [12] Open University Essential documents for students  http://www8.open.ac.uk/students/essential-documents/   [13] Unisa. 2012. Policy on research ethics.  http://cm.unisa.ac.za/contents/departments/res_policies/docs/ ResearchEthicsPolicy_apprvCounc_21Sept07.pdf   [14] Unisa. 2007. Students charter on rights and responsibilities.  http://cm.unisa.ac.za/contents/departments/studentaff_policie s/docs/StudentCharter_apprvCounc_30Nov07.pdf   [15] Unisa. 2007. Students disciplinary code.  https://my.unisa.ac.za/tool/a87dd927-a9e0-4b59-0012- 5ab7d72ca660/contents/courses/docs/StudentDisciplinaryCo de_apprvCounc_26Jan08.pdf    [16] Unisa. 2007. Information sensitivity classification policy.  http://cm.unisa.ac.za/contents/departments/corp_policies/doc s/InfoSensitivClassificAnnexA_apprvCounc_21Sept07.pdf   [17] Unisa. 2007. Records management policy.  http://cm.unisa.ac.za/contents/departments/corp_policies/doc s/RecordsManagementPolicy_ManCom_15May07.pdf     244      