Analytics on Video-Based Learning  Michail N. Giannakos  1 *, Konstantinos Chorianopoulos  2 , Marco Ronchetti  3 , Peter Szegedi  4 ,   Stephanie D. Teasley 5    1 Dept. of Computer and Information Science, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway   2 Department of Informatics, Ionian University, Corfu, Greece   3 Dipartimento di Ingegneria e Scienza dellInformazione, Universit di Trento, Povo di Trento, Italy   4 Trans European Research and Education Network Association (TERENA), Amsterdam, The Netherlands   5 School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA   michail.giannakos@idi.ntnu.no      ABSTRACT  The International Workshop on Analytics on Video-based   Learning (WAVe2013) aims to connect research efforts on Video-  based Learning with Learning Analytics to create visionary ideas   and foster synergies between the two fields. The main objective of   WAVe is to build a research community around the topical area of   Analytics on video-based learning. In particular, WAVe aims to   develop a critical discussion about the next generation of analytics   employed on video learning tools, the form of these analytics and   the way they can be analyzed in order to help us to better   understand and improve the value of video-based learning. WAVe   is based on the rationale that combining and analyzing learners'   interactions with other available data obtained from learners, new   avenues for research on video-based learning have emerged.   Categories and Subject Descriptors  K.3.1 [Computer Uses in Education] Computer-assisted   instruction (CAI), Distance learning; J.1 [Administrative Data   Processing] Education   General Terms  Measurement, Design, Experimentation, Human Factors,   Keywords  Video Based Learning, MOOCs, Learning Analytics, Interaction   Design.   1. BACKGROUND OF THE WORKSHOP  With the widespread adoption of video-based learning systems   such as Khan Academy and edX, new research in the area of   Learning Analytics has emerged. Even new for-profit companies,   such as Coursera and Udacity, have started offering forms of   instruction that are primarily video-based. To date, universities   across the globe (Stanford, Oxford, MIT and some 800 other   schools) offer video lectures on topics from Algebra to Zoology.   The use of video for learning has become widely employed in the   past years [3]. Many universities and digital libraries have   incorporated video into their instructional materials. Massive   Online Open Courses (MOOCs) are becoming an increasingly   important part of education. For instance, students access   academic content via digital libraries, discuss with tutors by email   and attend courses from their home. In order to support video   learning, various technological tools have been developed. For   example, Matterhorn and Centra are just few of them. These tools   provide an easy way for a learner who has missed a lecture to   catch up, but also enable other, especially slow learners, to review   difficult concepts.   Many instructors in higher education are implementing video   lectures in a variety of ways, such as broadcasting lectures in real   time, augmenting recordings of in-class lectures with face-to-face   meetings for review purposes, and delivering lecture recordings   before class to flip the classroom and provide hands-on   activities during class time. Other uses include showing videos   that demonstrate course topics and providing supplementary video   learning materials for self-study.   Millions of learners enjoy video streaming from different   platforms (e.g., YouTube) on a diverse number of terminals (TV,   desktop, smart phone, tablets) and create billions of simple   interactions. This amount of learning activity might be converted   via analytics into useful information [1, 5] for the benefit of all   video learners. As the number of learners' watching videos on   Web-based systems increases, more and more interactions have   the potential to be gathered. Capturing, sharing and analyzing   these interactions (datasets) can clearly provide scholars and   educators with valuable information [7]. In addition, the   combination of learner profiles with content metadata provide   opportunities for adding value to learning analytics obtained from   video based learning.   To explore the future of video-based technologies for teaching   and learning, we aim to build a research community around this   topical area, to brainstorm about what the next generation of   video-based learning tools might look like, what kind of data can   be collected, and how these data can help us to better understand   and improve the value of video-based learning.   Existing empirical research [e.g. 2, 3, 4, 6] has begun to identify   the educational advantages and disadvantages of video-based   learning. However, there still remain many essential unexplored   aspects of video-based learning and the related challenges and   opportunities; such as, how to use all the data obtained from the   learner, how to combine data from different sources, and so on.   WAVe aims to support this research endeavor through an   analytics approach to video-based learning. In particular, the   objective of this workshop is to bring together researchers,     Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).   LAK '13, Apr 08-12 2013, Leuven, Belgium   ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04.      * This work was carried out during the tenure of an ERCIM "Alain   Bensoussan" Fellowship programme. The research leading to these results   has received funding from the European Union Seventh Framework   Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no 246016.   283    designers, teachers, practitioners and policy makers who are   interested in how to do research on the use of any form of video   technology for supporting learning. This workshop will provide   an opportunity for these individuals to come together, discuss   current and future research directions, and build a community of   people interested in this area.   By taking into account learners' interactions and many other   datasuch as students' demographic characteristics of gender,   ethnicity, English-language skills, prior background knowledge,   their success rate in each section, their emotional states, the speed   at which they submit their answers, which video lectures seemed   to help which students best in which sections, etc. new avenues   for research in the intersection of video-based learning and   analytics are now possible.   2. WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES  The workshop will be an interactive, engaging experience that   will motivate participants to get involved and engage in fruitful   discussions on the topic of Video-Based Learning and the   potential benefits of Analytics. To do so, it will combine several   activities. First, highly recognized keynote speakers will open the   workshop. Then the workshop organizers will give the   participants the opportunity to be engaged into creative and   motivating discussions about the key issues related to analytics on   video-based learning.   One of our main objectives is to bring together researchers who   are interested on Learning Analytics and their application on   video-based learning. Specifically, WAVe aims to provide an   environment where participants will get opportunities to: develop   their research skills; increase their knowledge base; collaborate   with others in their own and complementary research areas; and   discuss their own work. In particular, guiding questions and   themes include:    What might next generation of analytics enhanced video   learning tools look like    What kind of data can be collected from video-based   learning tools     How these data can help us to better understand and   improve the value of video-based learning   3. ABOUT THE FACILITATORS  Michail N. Giannakos is an ERCIM/Marie Curie Fellow in the   Department of Computer and Information Science at Norwegian   University of Science and Technology (NTNU) and a Visiting   Richard T. Cheng Fellow in the Center for Real-Time Computing,   Virginia, USA. Giannakos is interested in how people learn in the   presence of technology and each other. Since 2010, he is a   member of the IFIP Working Group 3.1 on Informatics and ICT   in Secondary Education.   Konstantinos Chorianopoulos is Lecturer in the Department of   Informatics at the Ionian University, Corfu, Greece. He has been a   post-doctoral Marie Curie Fellow from 2006 to 2011. In 2002, he   founded UITV.INFO, which is a newsletter (currently a   discussion-group) and web portal for interactive television   research resources (papers, theses), news and events. He is serving   on the steering committee of the European Interactive TV   organization and on the editorial boards of the following journals:   Computers in Entertainment (ACM), Entertainment Computing   (Elsevier), Journal of Virtual Reality and Broadcasting.   Pter Szegedi is Project Development Officer of Trans European   Research and Education Network Association (TERENA). He is   also secretary of TF-Storage, TF-Media, TF-NOC, and the GLIF   Technical Working Group as well as coordinator of the End-to-  End Network Provisioning issues and the Video & Web   Conferencing activities and looks after the NRENum.net service.   He participated in the EC funded projects such as FP7-  FEDERICA (leader of NA2 & JRA2 activities) & IST-MUPBED.   Marco Ronchetti is a CS professor at the Department of   Information Engineering and Computer Science at the University   of Trento, Italy. He is author of more than hundred peer-reviewed   research articles in several international journals and conferences,   and over the last ten years his interests have focused in the area of   Educational Technology, especially in the area of video-supported   learning. He has been a director of the Master in Technologies for   System Integration and e-Government.   Stephanie D. Teasley is a research professor at the School of   Information and the director of the USE Lab at the University   Library, whose mission is to investigate how instructional   technologies and digital media are used to innovate teaching,   learning, and collaboration. Teasleys research utilizes Learning   Analytics to categorize and simplify the vast amount of data on   student engagement and learning available in the campus   Learning Management System.  She is on the Executive Board of   the Society for Learning Analytics Research (SoLAR).   4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  We would like to thank Dr. George Siemens and Dr. David Geerts   for accepting our invitation to give keynote presentations, the   workshop Program Committee members for accepting our   invitation and the workshop chairs for their constructive   comments and their helpful assistance.   5. REFERENCES  [1] Chorianopoulos, K., Leftheriotis, I. & Gkonela, C. 2011.   SocialSkip: pragmatic understanding within web video. In   Proceedings of EuroITV11, 2528.   [2] Giannakos, M. N. & Vlamos, P. 2013, Using webcasts in   education: Evaluation of its effectiveness. British Journal of   Educational Technology. doi:10.1111/j.1467-  8535.2012.01309.x   [3] Giannakos, M. N. 2013. Exploring the research on video   learning: A review of the literature. British Journal of   Educational Technology.   [4] Lonn, S. & Teasley, S. D. 2009. Podcasting in higher   education: What are the implications for teaching and   learning The Internet and Higher Education, 12, 88-92.   [5] Mertens, R., Farzan, R., & Brusilovsky, P. 2006. Social   navigation in web lectures. In Proceedings of HYPERTEXT   '06, 41-44.   [6] Ronchetti, M. 2010. Using video lectures to make teaching   more interactive, International Journal of Emerging   Technologies in Learning (iJET), 5 (2), 45-48.   [7] Verbert, K., et al., 2011. Dataset-driven Research for   Improving Recommender Systems for Learning. In   Proceedings of LAK '11, 44-53.   284      