Nanogenetic Learning Analytics: Illuminating Student Learning Pathways in an Online Fraction Game  Taylor Martin Ani Aghababyan  Jay Pfaffman Jenna Olsen  Utah State University Department of ITLS 2830 Old Main Hill  Logan, UT 84322-2830 +1-435-797-0814  taylormartin@usu.edu  Stephanie Baker Philip Janisiewicz  University of Texas at Austin Department of Curriculum and  Instruction 1 University Station D570  Austin, TX 78712 +1-956-536-4847  speacock@math.utexas.edu pjanisiewicz@gmail.com  Carmen Petrick Smith The University of Vermont  College of Education 411 Waterman  Burlington, VT 05405 +1-802-656-1411  carmen.smith@uvm.edu  Rachel Phillips University of Washington  Department of Educational Psychology and Learning  Sciences Seattle, WA 98105 +1-206-616-4480  rachelsp@uw.edu  ABSTRACT A working understanding of fractions is critical to student success in high school and college math. Therefore, an un- derstanding of the learning pathways that lead students to this working understanding is important for educators to provide optimal learning environments for their students. We propose the use of microgenetic analysis techniques in- cluding data mining and visualizations to inform our under- standing of the process by which students learn fractions in an online game environment. These techniques help identify important variables and classification algorithms to group students by their learning trajectories.  Categories and Subject Descriptors K.3 [Computers and Education]: General  General Terms Measurement, Documentation, Performance, Experimenta- tion.  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. LAK13 April 08 - 12 2013, Leuven, Belgium Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04 ...$15.00.  Keywords Measurement, Documentation, Performance, Experimenta- tion. Keywords Microgenetic research, process analysis, math- ematics education; rational numbers; fractions; games  1. INTRODUCTION Fractions have been described as an extremely challeng-  ing part of mathematics curriculum [5, 2, 10, 15, 12]. An understanding of fractions is critical to success in Algebra [15], a gatekeeper course to higher education [4, 16, 19].  A variety of models have been suggested to explain how students learn fractions. In our analysis, we draw on the splitting learning model [12, 3, 13, 16]. In this model, stu- dents learn fractions by first using their judgments of rela- tive magnitude and their ability to split a whole into equal parts. In this way, students develop an understanding of ra- tional numbers through creating equal divisions of a whole part and considering the numerical values for these dividing splits (see figure 1). Splitting is generally considered to be the most promising concept for teaching rational numbers to students because it draws on childrens intuitive under- standing of halving and because it is consistent with more advanced rational number concepts [3, 9, 14, 16, 17].  Microgenetic methods allow the discovery of learning pro- cesses and examination of how those processes relate to learning outcomes (e.g., [8, 18]). In classic microgenetic studies, researchers examined how participants strategies and understanding of tasks changed at the problem level over the course of several interviews during critical peri- ods of change for learning the specific content under study [8, 18]. Rather than relying on pre- and post-test perfor- mance to determine student learning, microgenetic analy-  165    Figure 1: A student splits a rectangle in half, then splits each half in half again, shades one of the re- sulting pieces, and concludes that it is one fourth of the rectangle.  sis has traditionally documented learning processes through video recordings and human codinga time consuming pro- cess.  We use learning analytics methods to examine how el- ementary students learn in Refraction [1]1, an online game designed to teach fractions using the splitting or equal parti- tioning model. The use of online game environments like Re- fraction simplifies and expands the data collection and anal- ysis process. We were able to collect data at the keystroke level on students play activity. As we analyze this data, we can expose patterns in students learning processes at a much finer grain size that was possible before, giving rise to the term nanogenetic analysis [8, 20].  2. METHODS In this study, ten and eleven year olds (N = 24; 13 boys,  11 girls) played Refraction over a period of approximately seven weeks in their classrooms. Refraction levels require users to solve fraction problems using 1/3 and 1/2splitters to divide a laser beam into the required pieces. Figure 2 shows an example of a level solution.  3. VISUALIZING STUDENTS LEARNING PROCESS  As a first step in examining our log data to understand learning process, we created visualizations of the pathway each student took through each level. Because we wanted to understand students learning process in regard to frac- tions, we focused only on the moves that had a mathemati- cal impact on the level (ignoring those moves which merely changed the direction of the laser). To illustrate how we vi- sualized students mathematical progressions, we will use a level that asked players to use 1/3 and 1/2 splitters to power a 1/6 and a 1/9 ship.  We started by creating representations of the state of the game space after each mathematical move. Figure 3 shows the initial state for each student; the whole laser beam aimed off the screen into space. The yellow circle represents the laser source, and the black circle indicates that the laser goes out in space without striking either target ship.  Figure 3: The initial state in an individual visual- ization.  1http://games.cs.washington.edu/refraction/  Figure 2: Steps for solving a level in Refraction. As students moved through the levels, the fractions became more difficult to solve.  As the student adds mathematical moves, the visualiza- tion became more complicated. In Figure 4, the student has now placed a 1/3 splitter on the laser beam.  Figure 4: A player places a 1/3 splitter on the beam.  Figure 5 shows a students progress through an entire level. The colors of the arrows shade from blue to red to indicate the order of the transitions.  166    Figure 5: A complete visualization for an individual student on a single level.  This student started the level as described above. Then, she placed a 1/2 splitter on one of her 1/3 laser beams. None of the resulting 1/3 or 1/6 beams hit a ship. Then she removed and replaced splitters to end up with the same resulting state. Next, she used benders to position one of her 1/6 beams so that it hit the 1/6 ship with the correct amount (the green diamond at the end of the beam shows that she hit the 1/6 ship with the correct amount). Next, she placed a 1/3 splitter on the other 1/6 beam and used bender to direct one of her resulting 1/18 laser beams into the 1/9 ship (the red square at the end of the 1/18 beam shows that she hit the 1/9 ship with an incorrect amount). Next, she removed the 1/3 splitter from the 1/6 beam, placed it on one of the 1/3 beams and used benders to direct one of the resulting 1/9 beams into the 1/9 ship (the green square shows this was accurate). The final state of the level has a red border. The color of the border only indicates that  this was the final state and not whether the final state was a successful solution for the level.  Comparing visualizations demonstrates differences in how students progressed through the same level. For example, Figures 5 and 6 both show students working on the 1/6, 1/9 level.  Figure 6: Visualization of a students in-game pre- level.  First, we can see that Figure 5 shows a successful attempt, while Figure 6 does not. Second, it is noticeable that Fig- ure 6 has many more repeated states (and therefore less states) than Figure 5.  4. CLASSIFYING STUDENTS LEARNING PROCESSES  Exploratory data analysis comparing and contrasting vi- sualizations of students pathways through individual levels and across levels helps us see aspects that differ across time and across students. The next step in our process has been to create variables that capture these aspects in ways that allow grouping of students in order to generate categories of learning pathways. For the dataset reported on here, students individual process visualizations showed a variety of patterns. However, many of these patterns were either (1) not repeated frequently enough in our small sample to provide a good basis for grouping, or (2) not meaningful. However, one pattern we noticed was that students tended to explore the space of the game in different ways. Some students seemed to avoid exploration and move quickly to solutions, while others seemed to experiment more with dif- ferent types of moves. This phenomenon captured our in- terest because there is significant debate about the role of exploration in learning (e.g., [6, 7, 11]). To begin to un- derstand these types of exploration better, we developed a coding scheme for transitions and a classification scheme for patterns of transitions over time.  4.1 Coding Transitions First, we identified each unique transition between states  in the students individual process visualization data de- scribed above. Then we coded each transition based on whether the move added or removed a splitter in a way that led the resulting game state to be potentially closer to a successful solution or not.  The primary coder created the coding scheme and coded all of the transitions. A secondary coder independently  167    coded one-third of the transitions. The two coders reached 90% agreement on their transition coding.  4.2 Categorizing Pathways Next, we developed a scheme to classify students trajec-  tories of transitions over the course of their pre- and post- levels. We categorized a student as experimenting with fail- ure if he made at least three transitions in a row that added potential failure. Similarly, we characterized a student as experimenting with success if she made at least three transi- tions in a row that added potential success. We also noticed that some students did not experiment much, but simply solved the problem.  Applying these simple criteria resulted in 3 trajectories:   Rapid success;   Experimenting primarily with success;   Experimenting primarily with failure;  Figures 7-9 show examples of these patterns.  Figure 7: Rapid success.  These patterns are intriguing in that they represent dif- ferent ways of exploring the space of the game. However, in this small dataset, it is difficult to draw conclusions relating type of pattern to outcome measures such as success on a level or time to complete a level.  5. CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS In this iteration of creating visualizations and categoriz-  ing pathways of learning, we developed our process of work and 1) illustrated that students can develop better frac- tion understanding using the splitting construct and 2) that nanogenetic approaches to data analysis do illuminate fine grained patterns showing that students explored the space of the game in a variety of ways.  Our small sample size and choice of using human coding for this iteration of our work were clear limitations. We are currently taking several steps to mitigate these limitations.  Figure 8: Experimenting with success.  Figure 9: Experimenting with failure.  In our exploratory analyses, we are developing visualiza- tions that make discovery of important variables easier. For example, our new visualization scheme shows the entire state space of the level as well as the states in that space that an individual student progressed through while solving that level. This allows us to compare areas of the state space across students and for the same student over time more easily.  In our work to develop better classification schemes, as we see patterns in learning pathways, we are analyzing these patterns to generate potential variables of interest such as time in state, number of unique states in a level, number of repeat moves, and distance between each state and the goal state. Using these variables, we are creating classification algorithms to group students based on patterns of behavior with a new larger dataset (N > 3000). To better under- stand splitting, we plan to characterize the development of fraction concepts using the individual trajectories through the levels, classify students based on how they do splitting,  168    and investigate whether different patterns are more or less associated with success.  6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This material is based on work supported by the Bill &  Melinda Gates Foundation, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Administration, and the National Science Founda- tion (Grant No. EEC 0748186). Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect posi- tions or policies of these agencies.  7. REFERENCES [1] E. Andersen, E. ORourke, Y. E. Liu, R. Snider,  J. Lowdermilk, D. Truong, S. Cooper, and Z. Popovic. The impact of tutorials on games of varying complexity. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 5968. ACM, 2012.  [2] M. Behr, G. Harel, T. Post, and R. Lesh. Rational number, ratio, and proportion. In D. Grouws, editor, Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning, page 296aAS333. National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, New York, NY, 1992.  [3] J. Confrey. Splitting, similarity, and rate of change: A new approach to multiplication and exponential functions. The development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics, pages 293330, 1994.  [4] J. Confrey and E. Smith. Splitting, covariation, and their role in the development of exponential functions. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, pages 6686, 1995.  [5] P. Gould, L. Outhred, and M. Mitchelmore. One-third is three-quarters of one-half. In Annual meeting of the Mathematics Education Research Group of Australia, 2006.  [6] M. Kapur. Productive failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3):379424, 2008.  [7] P. A. Kirschner, J. Sweller, and R. E. Clark. Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching. Educational psychologist, 41(2):7586, 2006.  [8] D. Kuhn. Microgenetic study of change: What has it told us Psychological Science, pages 133139, 1995.  [9] S. J. Lamon. The development of unitizing: Its role in childrens partitioning strategies. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, pages 170193, 1996.  [10] S. J. Lamon. Rational numbers and proportional reasoning: Towards a theoretical framework for research. In F. Lester, editor, Second Handbook of Research on Mathematics Teaching and Learning, pages 629667. Information Age Publishing, Charlotte, NC, 2007.  [11] T. Martin and D. L. Schwartz. Physically distributed learning: Adapting and reinterpreting physical environments in the development of fraction concepts. Cognitive Science, 29(4):587625, 2005.  [12] J. Moss. Pipes, tubes, and beakers: New approaches to teaching the rational-number system. In S. Donovan and J. Bransford, editors, How students  learn: History, mathematics, and science in the classroom, page 309aAS350. National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005.  [13] J. Moss and R. Case. Developing childrens understanding of the rational numbers: A new model and an experimental curriculum. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, pages 122147, 1999.  [14] M. Myers, J. Confrey, K. Nguyen, and G. Mojica. Equipartitioning a continuous whole among three people: Students attempts to create fair shares. In S. L. Swars, D. W. Stinson, and S. Lemons-Smith, editors, Proceedings of the 31st annual meeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, Atlanta, GA, 2009. Georgia State University.  [15] National Mathematics Advisory Panel. Foundations for success: The final report of the National Mathematics Advisory Panel. US Department of Education, 2008.  [16] A. Norton and A. J. Hackenberg. Continuing research on students fraction schemes. LP Steffe & J. Olive, Childrens fractional knowledge, pages 341352, 2010.  [17] J. Olive and L. P. Steffe. The construction of an iterative fractional scheme: The case of joe. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 20(4):413437, 2001.  [18] R. Siegler, T. Carpenter, F. Fennell, D. Geary, J. Lewis, Y. Okamoto, L. Thompson, and J. Wray. Developing effective fractions instruction for kindergarten through 8th grade. ies practice guide. ncee 2010-4039. What Works Clearinghouse, 2010.  [19] J. W. Stigler, K. B. Givvin, and B. J. Thompson. What community college developmental mathematics students understand about mathematics. MathAmatyc Educator, 1(3):416, 2010.  [20] A. Venezia, K. R. Bracco, and T. Nodine. One-shot  deal StudentsaAZ perceptions of assessment and course placement in CaliforniaaAZs community colleges. WestEd, San Francisco, 2010.  169      