Visualizing Social Learning Ties by Type and Topic:  Rationale and Concept Demonstrator   Bieke Schreurs1, Chris Teplovs2, Rebecca Ferguson3,   Maarten de Laat1 and Simon Buckingham Shum3     1 Open Universiteit NL  LooK, Postbus 2960   6401 DL Heerlen  The Netherlands   bieke.schreurs@ou.nl  maarten.delaat@ou.nl   2 Problemshift, Inc. &  University of Windsor  401 Sunset Avenue   Windsor, Ontario  Canada N9B 3P4   chris.teplovs@gmail.com   3 The Open University UK  Institute of Educational Technology   & Knowledge Media Institute  Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK    r.m.ferguson@open.ac.uk  s.buckingham.shum@open.ac.uk       ABSTRACT  Social Learning Analytics (SLA) are designed to support students  learning through social networks, and reflective practitioners  engage in informal learning through a community of practice.  This short paper reports work in progress to develop SLA  motivated specifically by Networked Learning Theory, drawing  on the related concepts and tools of Social Network Analytics and  Social Capital Theory, which provide complementary  perspectives onto the structure and content of such networks. We  propose that SLA based on these perspectives needs to devise  models and visualizations capable of showing not only the usual  SNA metrics, but the types of social tie forged between actors,  and topic-specific subnetworks. We describe a technical  implementation demonstrating this approach, which extends the  Network Awareness Tool by automatically populating it with data  from a social learning platform SocialLearn. The result is the  ability to visualize relationships between people who interact  around the same topics.    Categories and Subject Descriptors  K.3.1 [Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in Education   H.5.3 [Group and Organization Interfaces] Computer- supported cooperative work   General Terms  Design   Keywords  Networked Learning, Social Learning Analytics, Social Network  Analysis, Visualization     1. INTRODUCTION  An online network of learners in a formal or informal educational  context, or reflective practitioners in a community of practice, can   be regarded as constituting a web of social relationships that  reflects the flow of resources among them [1]. Examples include a  group acquiring competence in technology use by sharing  expertise, a community collectively building knowledge of its  history, plus information resources necessary to deal with new  situations [2].    Reflective practitioners, mentors and researchers could benefit  from answers to questions such as: Who learns from whom What  do they learn from each other What kinds of interactions take  place between people who learn together In which directions do  resources flow How frequently do learning interactions take  place How important are these interactions to the people  involved What value do these learning interactions create    From a learning analytics point of view, if it is possible to design  computationally tractable models of such learning networks, and  render them in coherent ways, analytics could draw attention to  potentially significant patterns based on the content, direction,  type and strength of interpersonal interactions. To provide  analytics for complex queries such as these, we need to design  structural signatures in our data models to serve as proxies,  which can be detected by humans and/or machines. In this short  paper, we report work in progress from combining OUNLs  research into the Network Awareness Tool (NAT) for visualizing  professional face-to-face informal learning networks [3-4], with  the OUs proposal that Social Learning Analytics are an important  class of analytic for participatory learning cultures [5].    In 2 we introduce Networked Learning theory, the paradigm  motivating this work. 3 considers the steps needed to move from  this to Social Learning Analytics software which satisfies the  theorys representational requirements. 4 then describes a  demonstrator tool which goes beyond seeing social networks in  topological terms (a well established approach), and seeks to show  (i) the topics of interest (possibly expertise) within the  community, and (ii) the nature of the social ties constituting the  network.    2. NETWORKED LEARNING THEORY  Networked learning theory is an emerging perspective that is  employed to understand learning by investigating how people  develop and maintain a web of social relations to support their  learning. Networked learning is a form of informal learning,  which involves people relying strongly on their social contacts for  assistance and development [6]. Recent research has linked  networked learning to an array of positive outcomes, including  student performance and school improvement [7-10]. Networked      Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,  or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior  specific permission and/or a fee.  LAK '13, April 08 - 12 2013, Leuven, Belgium   Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1785-6/13/04      33    learning involves the use of information and communication  technology (ICT) to promote collaborative or cooperative  connections between learners, their tutors/instructors, and learning  resources [11]. The term networked learning was applied to  higher education to refer to ways in which new communication  technologies can influence teaching and learning [12-14].   As ICT drives increasingly varied forms of mediated collaboration  and contact, the field of networked learning seeks to provide  accounts of how learners appropriate these new tools to learn  informally on and through the Internet. The fields focus is on  how learners (or learning designers) can build and cultivate social  networks, seeing technology as just one (albeit critical) enabler,  rather than ICT-innovation as an end in itself [1, 15].    Networked learning focuses on the diversity of social  relationships that people develop, the strategies they use to  maintain them and the value this creates for learning. Networked  learning theory is closely linked to and uses methodologies of  social network theory, including social network analysis [7, 15].    Social network analysis considers networks to be made up of  nodes and ties. Nodes are the individual actors within a network  and ties are the relationships between these actors. The impact of  the structure of social networks can be studied on three levels: the  positions actors have in a network (individual dimension), the  relationships between actors in the network (ties dimension) and  the overall network structure (network dimension).   While social network theory highlights the structural dimensions  of learning networks, we also use social capital theory to frame  social network studies from the perspective of content. Networks  are always about something [6-7]. Social capital theory provides a  lens through which we can examine the relational resources  embedded in social ties and the ways in which actors interact to  gain access to these resources [16].    The first systematic analysis of social capital was produced by  Bourdieu [17], who defined the concept as the aggregate of the  actual or potential resources existing within the relationships of a  durable network. According to Lin [18], the common denominator  of all major social capital theories can be summarized as: The  resources embedded in social relations and social structure which  can be mobilised when an actor wishes to increase the likelihood  of success in purposive action. (p. 24).    A communities-of-practice perspective considers that networks, to  be fruitful and active, require a shared framework of values and  norms [2]. Learning within communities is a process within which  both individual and collective learning goals and agendas are  carefully and constantly negotiated in relation to a topic or domain  that is of interest to each participant [19-20].    3. TRANSLATION INTO ANALYTICS   The Networked Learning position outlined above serves to define  the broad set of phenomena considered to be important in  designing effective informal learning, drawing on disciplinary  perspectives and tools such as Social Network Analysis and  Social Capital Theory. In order to translate this into a Social  Learning Analytics software tool [5], there are minimally three  interdependent steps: data capture, analysis and visualization.    Data capture. Our work on NAT has focused, to date, on face-to- face professional learning, with participants manually  constructing their networks. NAT enabled them to see, literally  and usually for the first time, what these networks looked like,  and where new relevant colleagues might be. The transition to   Social Learning Analytics, with its focus on the appropriation of  social media for learning, required the integration of NAT with an  online learning platform, with the objective of generating NAT  visualizations automatically from social interactions logged in the  database. We selected the OUs SocialLearn system [5, 15] as a  data source, since we have complete control over the platform.  Analysis. It is necessary to translate the networked learning  concepts such as strength of social tie and social capital, and  levels of analysis such as individual, ties and network dimensions,  into a data model whose structures have the potential to answer  queries such as In which directions do resources flow  Visualization. None of this pays off unless stakeholders can  interact with the analytics that render their connected world more  visible [19]. Visualizing networked learning activities can also  assist strategic networked learning by helping learners to decide  which networks they should join and which experts they should  aim to connect with. Commonly used network visualization  software includes NetDraw [21], Gephi [22], NodeXL[23], JUNG  [24], Pajek[25] and several packages for R [26].    The approach taken in the design and development of the NAT  plug-in for SocialLearn differed from these in two major ways.   First, the software is designed to be used by participants who are  not network analysis experts or researchers.  Second, the  conceptual framework we have requires data capture and network  filtering by semantic content (topic or tag) as well as by the type  of the social tie, moving beyond undifferentiated nodes and ties.   4. NAT PLUGIN FOR SOCIALLEARN   In this section we describe how we visualize multiple levels  inherent in networked learning based on the learning activities  within SocialLearn. The plug-in, based on the Network  Awareness Tool [4], is designed to be compatible with any  modern web browser and was developed using widely available  JavaScript libraries.  For the SocialLearn plug-in, we have set up  the following framework, taking into account the theoretical  perspectives introduced above.    4.1 Visualizing the Network Structure  The NAT plugin visualizes the overall structure of the network to  the users. A graphical representation of the ego-network and  overall network structure is visualized reflecting the current state  of the network. The ego-network perspective is the network from  one node. The overall network structure is the total of all nodes.    The resulting network of actors, with multiplex ties, is laid out  using a force-directed layout algorithm. The resulting diagram is  often complex. To reduce this complexity, users are offered a  variety of ways in which they can zoom in on areas of interest,  filter out extraneous data, and request details of any particular  data [27]. In addition to these filters, users can request  computational assistance from the system to reposition the filtered  actors. In this case, the layout algorithm is re-applied to the data  points of interest. A screencast demonstrating the functionality of  the plug-in is online, as shown in Figure 1.   Social network theory considers that the constitution of a network  may influence the accessibility of information and resources and  that its social structure may offer potential for the exchange of  resources [28-29]. Understanding the structure of a network can  reveal the information flow within an online learning environment  [30]. Teams with the same skill composition can act differently  depending on the structure of relations within the team and,  similarly, individual can act differently depending on their  position within a network [8, 31].    34    To gain more insight into the tie level, we combine data about  frequency and quality with the social network analysis. This  supports investigation of the role of strong and weak ties in a  learning network. Combining data on the frequency and the  quality can be very valuable [31].    Levin and Cross [32] found that networked learners rely on weak  ties with competent people they can trust. Raegans and McEvily  [33] add that the transfer of tacit knowledge is a sensitive process  and therefore fewer people are able to engage in this process.  Strong ties are also important, because they are employed to  deepen and embed knowledge that is closely related to day-to-day  shared practice, as well as to build commitment to joint activities.   4.2 Visualizing the expertise and content   What is the focus of the network Which themes are discussed  Who is related to what theme Who is at the centre of that theme  This is represented in a tagcloud, reflecting the topics participants  have declared on their SocialLearn profile pages.   At an overall network level, learners can see in the general  tagcloud all learning topics associated with the whole community.  By clicking on a tag, learners filter the network and see only other  learners who have an interest in that learning theme. By  identifying topographically central people within the network,  they can identify the most active people, as well as potential  experts in the field. So learners can use the NAT plug-in as a  Social Learning Browser to locate people who are dealing with  the same learning topics. This is based on the logic of social  recommender systems, but most recommender systems are based  on people you may know through other connections, rather than  the thematic content around which people form relations.     Social learning is often mediated via artifacts, and social capital  can involve the exchanging of material resources. So both  SocialLearn actors and artifacts are used as sources of tags,  examples of artifacts being Questions posted to the Q&A site, and  Steps on a learning Path. For our analysis, tags on artifacts that  mediated associations between actors were added to the actors  themselves. For example, if Actor A posted a Thought (analogous  to a status update) with Tag T, and Actor B commented on that  Thought, then Tag T would also be associated with Actor B. In  this way we are able to visualize the flow of topics between  actors.    Because people learn through an active social process of meaning  construction [34], it is necessary to take the content of the   interactions into account. The kind of information that is  exchanged may influence the nature of the learning tie. While  most social networking sites focus on finding people with a  certain expertise, the NAT plug-in also focuses on finding people  with the same learning topic and learning problem.    4.3 Multiplexity of Learning Ties  Engaging in networked learning means that learners need to be in  touch with others in their network and need to build the  networked connections that are required to participate in  constructive conversations [4]. However, this is not easy because  networked learning is a complex process situated in a changing  context. It is difficult to pare this process down to one or two  variables. A learning relation is a multiplex set of relations all  acting at the same time.      Figure 1: Using NAT to visualize and filter social ties by person, type of tie, and topic. Due to space limitations, this is a composite  image showing the entire unfiltered network, but when a user is selected this filters the left-panel as shown, to display only her  ego-network and topics. Screencast: http://bit.ly/NAT-SocialLearn   35    In many analyses of social networks, ties between actors are  differentiated only in terms of their relative strength. The  SocialLearn platform supports a wide variety of actions that can  result in the creation of ties between actors. Here we describe  responding ties, follower ties and friendship ties (which as  explained, can be further contextualized through the use of tags).   Actions that can result in interaction ties between actors include  responding to materials contributed by another actor (typically  through commenting on or replying to postings). Thus, if Actor B  comments on a posting by Actor A there would be a respond  type tie from Actor B to Actor A.   Ties can be used to describe relations between actors in  SocialLearn. Two types of actions were used to generate relations:  friending (i.e. identifying another actor as someone who is a  colleague, acquaintance or friend) and following (i.e. identifying  that you want to be notified of the activities of another actor).  Both these actions serve to indicate that one actor is in some way  interested in another actor. Relations are directional and  potentially non-symmetric (e.g. Actor A can identify Actor B as a  friend without Actor B identifying Actor A as a friend).    We found it important to include these friend and follower  learning relationships because learning can be supported if  relations between students in the network are characterized by  trust, openness and confidence [35]. According to Argyris and  Schn [36], trust and openness in social relations make it possible  to test theories, experiences and practices. Borgatti and Cross [37]  found that students are most likely to seek information from work- related experts who they believe will not make them feel  uncomfortable. Figure 2 shows how the network visualization can  be filtered and thus redrawn by combining different ties.   5. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK  To summarise, we have presented our Networked Learning  theoretical perspective, and described a demonstrator which  begins to show how this can be translated into a Social Learning  Analytics tool. The NAT plug-in for SocialLearn visualizes  networks by identifying relationships between people who interact  around the same learning topics. From an ego-perspective  learners can see their own learning network, consisting of their  friends, followers and other learners with whom they have  interacted. This means that the NAT plug-in has the potential to  provoke learning-centric reflection by learners on how they use  their peers for learning. Learners can also see the content of the  ties, summarized in one or more tags.    Educators can use the plug-in to guide students in the  development of networked learning competences and to gain  insight into the ability of groups of students to learn collectively  over time. Using this plug-in, educators can detect multiple  (isolated) networks within the online learning environment,  connect ideas and foster collaboration beyond existing boundaries.    The visualizations and network data can be used to carry out  social network analysis of the density of a network, including the  centrality of persons within a network, the structure, cliques, etc,  in real time or over a specified period. For researchers, the  analysis of learning ties and networks helps clarify how  professionals engage in learning relationships, as well as the value  of this engagement.    This work is at an early stage. We have completed one iteration to  put the representational infrastructure in place, which now opens  up many possible lines of enquiry. More research is needed to   investigate which sets of ties can predict or stimulate learning. It  may prove possible to apply the theory of Borgatti and Cross [37]  to an online learning environment and to investigate whether  people who are friends are more likely to seek information from  each other.   We have not yet analysed whether different ties yield  sytematically different structures. Qualitative research is needed  to interview actors about their perceptions of their learning  networks, their (and mentors) reactions to these visualizations.  What do learners themselves perceive as the best types of learning  tie Does the content of ties influence the structure of the learning  network of which it forms a part, and does it help us track the  flow of social capital within a network   We plan to develop the NAT plug-in further in order to make it  possible to conduct temporal SNA in order to study network  dynamics. A replay tool should help see the growth of the  overall network and changes in the networked learning behaviour  of individual students. Do students find more peers to learn from  using the NAT plug-in    6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  We gratefully acknowledge The Open University for making this  work possible through a SocialLearn Project Internship awarded  to the first author.     Figure 2: A subnetwork already filtered by topic. Actors  may be connected by any combination of the ties friend /  follow / respond, reflected in the combination of colours on  the links (top). Link thickness reflects quantitative  strength (e.g. many blue responses between actors).  Filtering on just friend ties (lower) refreshes the network  layout, revealing a different structure in which actors may  become more central/peripheral.   36    7. REFERENCES  1. Lave, J., & Wenger, E. 1991. Situated learning- Legitimate   peripheral participation. Cambridge University Press,  Cambridge, United Kingdom.   2. Wenger, E., Trayner, B., & De Laat, M. 2011. Telling stories  about the value of communities and networks: A toolkit.  Ruud de Moor Centrum, Open Universiteit.   3. De Laat, M.F., & Schreurs, B. (2011). Network Awareness  Tool: Social software for visualizing, analysing and  managing social networks. Ruud de Moor Centrum, Open  Universiteit Nederland, Heerlen.   4. Schreurs, B., & de Laat, M. (2012). Network Awareness  Tool  Learning Analytics in the workplace: Detecting and  Analyzing Informal Workplace Learning. Paper presented at  LAK12: 2nd International Conference on Learning Analytics  and Knowledge (30 April - 2 May), Vancouver, Canada.   5. Ferguson, R., & Buckingham Shum, S. (2012). Social  Learning Analytics: Five Approaches. Paper presented at  LAK12: 2nd International Conference on Learning Analytics  and Knowledge (30 April - 2 May), Vancouver, Canada.   6. Jones, C., Asensio, M., & Goodyear, P. 2000. Networked  learning in higher education: practitioners perspectives.  Journal of the Assoc. for Learning Technology, 8, 2, 18-28.   7. Coburn, C. E., & Russell, J. L. 2008. District policy and  teachers social networks. Education Evaluation and Policy  Analysis, 30, 203-235.   8. Moolenaar, N. M., Daly, A. J., & Sleegers, P. J. C. in press.  Ties with potential: Social network structure and innovative  climate in Dutch schools. Teachers College Record.   9. Penuel, W. R., Riel, M., Joshi, A., Pearlman, L., Kim, C. M.,  & Frank, K. A. 2010. The alignment of the informal and  formal organizational supports for reform: Implications for  improving teaching in schools. Educational Administration  Quarterly, 46, 1, 57-95.   10. Pil, F., & Leana, C. 2009. Applying organization research to  public school reform. Acad. Mngmnt Jnl., 56, 2, 1101-24.   11. Goodyear, P., Banks, S., Hodgson, V. & McConnell, D.  2004. Advances in research on networked learning. Kluwer  Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA.   12. Siemens, G. 2004. Connectivism: A learning theory for the  digital age, International Journal of Instructional Technology  and Distance Learning. (Nov.2006), 226.  http://www.itdl.org/Journal/Jan_05/article01.htm    13. De Laat, M. 2006. Networked learning. Politieacademie,  Apeldoorn.   14. Steeples, C. and Jones, C. (Eds.) 2002 Networked learning:  Perspectives and issues. Springer, London.    15. Ferguson, R., & Buckingham Shum, S.(2012). Towards a  social learning space for open educational resources. In A.  Okada, T. Connolly, & P. Scott (Eds.), Collaborative  Learning 2.0: Open Educational Resources (pp. 309-327):  IGI.   16. Nahapiet, J. 2009. Capitalizing on connections: social capital  and strategic management. In Social capital: reaching out,  reaching in, V.O. Bartkus and J.H. Davis, Editors. Edward  Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham.    17. Bourdieu, P. 1985. The social space and the genesis of  groups. Theory and Society, 14, 6, 723-744.   18. Lin, N. and J. Smith. 2009. A Theory Of Social Structure And  Action. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.   19. De Laat, M.F. 2011. Bridging the knowledge gap: Using  Social Network Methodology for Detecting, Connecting and  Facilitating Informal Networked Learning in Organizations.  Paper presented at the 44th IEEE Annual Hawaii  International Conference on System Sciences, Kuaui, HI.   20. De Laat, M. 2006. Networked learning. Politieacademie,  Apeldoorn.   21. Borgatti, S.P., 2002. NetDraw Software for Network  Visualization. Analytic Technologies: Lexington, KY   22. Bastian M., Heymann S., Jacomy M. (2009). Gephi: an open  source software for exploring and manipulating  networks. International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and  Social Media.   23. Smith, M., Milic-Frayling, N., Shneiderman, B., Mendes  Rodrigues, E., Leskovec, J., Dunne, C., (2010). NodeXL: a  free and open network overview, discovery and exploration  add-in for Excel 2007/2010, http://nodexl.codeplex.com  Social Media Research Fndn: http://www.smrfoundation.org    24. Madadhain, J., Fisher, D., Smyth, P., White, S.,  Boey, Y.B.  (2005). "Analysis and visualization of network data using  JUNG". Journal of Statistical Software: 125.   25. Batagelj V., Mrvar A.: Pajek - Analysis and Visualization of  Large Networks. in Jnger, M., Mutzel, P., (Eds.) Graph  Drawing Software. Springer, Berlin 2003. p. 77-103.   26. R Development Core Team (2008). R: A language and  environment for   statistical computing. R Foundation for  Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. http://www.R- project.org.   27. Shneiderman, B. 1996. The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data  Type Taxonomy for Information Visualizations.  In Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual  Languages (VL '96). IEEE Computer Society, Washington,  DC, USA, 336-343.   28. Scott, J. and P. Carrington. 2010. Handbook of Social  Network Analysis. Sage, London.   29. Wasserman, S. and K. Faust. 1994. Social Network Analysis.  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.   30. Daly, A..J. 2010. Relationships in reform: the role of  teachers' social networks. Journal of Educational  Administration, 48, 3, 359-391.   31. Granovetter, M. 1979. The strength of weak ties. American  Journal of Sociology, 78, 1360-1380.   32. Levin, D. Z. & Cross, R. 2004. The strength of weak ties you  can trust: The mediating role of trust in effective knowledge  transfer. Management Science, 50, 11, 1477-1490.   33. Reagans, R. & McEvily, B. 2003. Network structure and  knowledge transfer: The effects of cohesion and range.  Administrative Science Quarterly, 48, 240-267.   34. Elliot Soloway, Mark Guzdial, and Kenneth E. Hay. 1994.  Learner-centered design: the challenge for HCI in the 21st  century. Interactions 1, 2 (April 1994), 36-48.    35. Bottrup, P. 2005. Learning in a network: A third way  between school learning and workplace learning Journal of  Workplace Learning, 17(8): 508521   36. Argyris, C. & Schon, D. A. (1996). Organizational learning  Il: Theorv, method and practice. Reading. MA: Addison- Wesley.    37. Borgatti, S.P. and Cross, R. 2003. A Relational View of  Information Seeking and Learning in Social Networks.  Management Science. 49(4):432-445.   37      